

CONTENTS 


Introduction .7 

Seneca’s Life 7 

Seneca AND Philosophy 14 

Seneca AND Literature 20 

His letters and other writings 20 

His style 22 

His injiuence and appeal , 24 

Note on translation and text 26 

Postscript 28 

LETTERS 31 

Notes 233 

Bibliography 241 

Appendix : Tacitus’ account of Seneca’s death 243 
Index of persons and places 245 




INTRODUCTION 


senega’s life 

Lucius Annaeus Seneca was bom at Cordoba, then the 
leading town in Roman Spain, at about the same time as 
Christd His father, Marcus Annaeus Seneca, was an imperial 
procurator^ who became an authority on rhetoric, the art of 
public speaking and debate.^ He was the father not only of 
our Seneca, who speaks of his ‘old-fashioned strictness 
but also of Novatus, later knowm as GaUio, the governor of 
Achaea who declined to exercise jurisdiction over St Paul 
(Acts XVin, II-17), and of Mela, less ambitious than his 
brothers but an able financier (and father of the brilhant young 
poet Lucan). 

Seneca suffered severely from ill health, particularly asthma, 
throughout his life; he tells us that at one time the only thing 
which held him back from committing suicide was the 
thought of his father’s inability to bear the loss.^ He spent a 
period of his early life in Egypt (where the husband of a 
devoted aunt named Marcia was the viceroy ‘of the emperor 
Tiberius from a.d. 16 to 31), there acquiring experience in 
matters of administration and finance. He also studied the 
geography and ethnology of Egypt and India® and developed a 
lasting interest in natural science, speculative rather than 
empirical (although Pliny speaks of him as an authority on 
geplogy, marine life and meteorology, and others have 
admired his remarks on, for example, evolution or the ex- 
planation of rings roimd the sxm). His interest was drawn at 
an early age to Pythagorean mysticism and various cults of 
eastern origin then gaining adherents in Rome, before his 
final acceptance, in large part, of the Stoic philosophy. 


7 



INTRODUCTION 


After training for the bar he took successfully to public 
life, becoming quaestor in spite of the handicaps of his 
health, his foreign background and comparative lack of 
family or other connexions. When Caligula succeeded Tiberius 
in A.D. 37, Seneca had become a leading speaker in the 
Senate, and so aroused the jealousy’ of the new emperor that 
according to Dio Cassius he ordered his execution and was 
only induced to let him off by a woman close to the imperial 
throne who said that Seneca was ‘suffering from advanced 
tuberculosis and it would not be long before he died’.® This 
incident apparently resulted in his temporary retirement from 
political affairs. 

In A.D. 41, in the first year of the reign of Caligula’s 
successor, Claudius, Seneca again came imder sentence of 
death - commuted to banishment - for reasons which we do 
not know. The pretext was adultery with Julia Livilla, the 
late emperor’s sister; the more likely explanation® is that the 
new ruler’s consort, the notorious Messalina, considered him 
dangerous. His exile on the island of Corsica does not seem 
to have been endured as stoically as it might have been. The 
encouraging spirit of an essay of consolation sent to his dearly 
loved mother Helvia is entirely absent in another addressed 
to Polybius, an ex-slave who had become a trusted servant of 
the emperor, which contains some abject flattery and was 
probably never meant to be published. He had by now suffered 
the loss not only of his father but of a son, and his first wife 
died while he was away. The only solace for him in these 
eight long years of loneliness and near, despair was the 
reception given to the poems, tragedies and essays to fiiends 
which he continued composing during his banishment. 

His fortunes turned dramatically in A.D. 49. Messalina had 
been executed and the emperor’s new wife, Agrippina, had 
Seneca recalled to Rome, appointed to the high office of 
praetor and made tutor to her twelve-year-old son Lucius 



INTRODUCTION 


Domitius Ahenobarbus (the boy wlio was shortly to become 
the emperor Nero). Agrippina's motives, according to 
Tacitus, apart from the instruction of her son, were a confi- 
dence that because of his ‘literary fame’ die move would 
gain them popularity, and a belief that he would prove a 
reliable ally and a useful adviser to herself and Nero in their 
plans for future power.^° 

There is no evidence that Seneca was connected with the 
poisoning of Claudius in a.d. 54. But he wrote the speeches 
wliich the seventeen-year-old Nero delivered after his 
accession, and was probably the author of a witty, if to us a 
little tasteless, attack on the dead ruler’s memory (the 
Apocolocytitosis or ‘Pumpkinification’, an imaginary tale of 
the rebuffs received by the recently deceased emperor when 
he presents himself at the portals of Heaven and his applica- 
tion for admission is debated by the Gods). Nero did make a- 
formal speech in honour of his predecessor, which was said 
to display ‘a great deal of polish’ and to be a good example of 
Seneca’s ‘attractive style, well tuned to the ears of his time’.^^ 

The new regime opened well and ‘Nero’s first five years’ 
were later spoken of as a period of unequalled good govern- 
ment, the emperor Trajan even calling them the finest period 
in the history of imperial Rome.^^ For this Rome was in-, 
debted to Seneca and an army officer named Burrus. These 
two, ‘the most influential as well as the most enlightened of 
the men who surroimded Nero’ (Dio),^^ ‘whose, wide 
experience was conmion knowledge’ (Tacitus),’^*’’ prevented 
the hot-headed yormg man from carrying out a lot of murders 
on his accession and aimed at chaimelling some of his energies 
into ‘permissible pleasures’.^® Only briefly alarmed by the 
, poisoiung of Britannicus and acting throughout in complete 
harmony they succeeded in keeping public business out of 
Agrippina’s hands and in their own., Tacitus ascribes the 
secret of the influence of Seneca to ‘his tuition of Nero in 


9 



INTRODUCTION 

public speaking, and his engaging manners and high princi- 
ples , that of Burrus to ‘his military responsibilities and 
austerity of character’/® 

The two of them ‘took over total power, and exercised it, 
to the utmost of their ability, in the best and justest way 
conceivable, thus each alike" arousing all men’s approval’ 
(Dio)/’’' While Nero amused himself they set about the 
problems of government; we notice - to give instances of 
their activity - legal and financial reforms including the 
reduction of indirect taxation and steps to prevent peculation 
and extortion by provincial governors, and the prosecution of 
a successful war in Armenia to settle the empire’s eastern 
firontier. Seneca’s geographical interests appear in the dis- 
patch of an expedition ‘to investigate the soinrce of the 
Nile , Yet another of his interests was shorthand, the Roman 
system of which he is said to have completely revised. 

Neither he nor , Burrus appears to have held any standing 
legal or constitutional office that could be said to give them 
the authority they wielded during these years. Seneca, ‘the 
real master of the world seems simply to have been the 
moving force behind the throne. It is probably safe to say 
that Nero (unlike Aristotle’s celebrated pupil at a similar age, 
Alexander the Great) was still imder the influence of a 
teacher of imdoubted personal charm, and was quite content 
to leave to him the direction of affairs in which he had little 
real interest. Once the yoimg emperor began to hsten to 
other advisers and increasingly to indulge his more violent 
and vindictive impulses this happy situation was doomed. 

In A.D. 58 Seneca was being attacked by people like 
Publius Suilhus Rufus.^^ Accusations seem to have ranged in 
gravity from sleeping with the emperor’s mother (obviously 
the man had failed to learn his lesson from his ‘thoroughly 
deserved’ banishment for ‘seducing imperial princesses ) and 
the introduction of the emperor to paederasty, to the use- 


10 



INTRODUCTION 


lessness of his studies and the affectedness of his oratorical 
style. But the campaign against him generally centred on 
the apparent contrast - it has been a stock criticism of Seneca 
right down the centuries - betw-een his philosophical teach- 
ings and his practice. Instances of tliis hypocrisy, according to 
Suillius, were the philosopher’s denunciations of tyranny, 
which did not stop him from being tutor to a tyrant; of 
flattery, ill according with the attitude he had adopted, 
especially from exile, towards ex-slaves who headed depart- 
ments in Claudius’ administration; , of extravagance, in spite 
of (allegedly) giving banquets served at five hundred identical 
tables of citrus wood with ivory legs; and, above all, of 
wealth. ‘What kind of wisdom,’ asked Suilhus, ‘what philo- 
sophical teachings, had led him to acquire three huridred 
milhpn sesterces within the space of four years in royal 
favour? The childless and their legacies had been, if he might 
so put it, enticed into Seneca’s net, whilst all Italy and the 
provinces were being sucked dry by his practice of lending 
money at luilunited rates of interest.’ 

Seneca was indeed already celebrated for his riches. Juvenal 
mentions ‘the great Gardens of the immensely wealthy 
Seneca’.^® Agrippina, Says Dio, had acquired for him ‘untold 
wealth from aU sources The agricultural writer Columella 
mentions the remarkable productivity of his wine growing 
estates, the best in Italy, at Mentana.^^ The reply, if any, 
which Seneca gave to his attackers’ criticisms of his wealth, 
was probably that contained in an essay On the Happy Life 
sent to his brother GaUio. What coimts, he says, is one’s 
attitude to wealth, which is the wise man’s servant and the 
fool’s master; he, like any good Stoic, could lose aU he had 
at any moment without being a whit less happy. This is the 
core of a long reply to the charge, which he states with 
complete frankness, that ‘philosophers do not practise what ‘ 
they preach’. His everyday life did not lend countenance to 


II 



INTRODUCTION 

such attacks (we have at least his o^vn accounts^^ of his plain 
diet and life-long teetotalism, his hard bed, cold baths and 
daily runs) ; and on this occasion he came to no harm from 
his enemies. 

In A. D. 59 Nero had his mother put to death, the murder 
being carried out in cold blood after the calamitous failure 
of an attempt to stage an accident at sea. There is reason to 
believe that Seneca and Burrus had no knowledge of or part 
in the planning of this crime, but as the facts became known 
did their best to lessen its hnpact on public opinion. Seneca 
certainly drafted the letter sent to the Senate ‘explaining’ how 
her death was the result of the exposure of a dangerous plot 
of hers against the emperor’s life. Dio would have us believe 
that Seneca averted a general massacre by saying to Nero, 
However many people you slaughter you cannot kill your 
successor.’^'* 

Tacitus^^ tells us that the death {‘probably murder’) of 
Burrus in a.d. 62 ‘broke Seneca’s power’. Enemies gained 
the ear of Nero with tales of Seneca’s popularity and growing 
wealth; the first was represented as being dangerous to the 
throne, the second as overshadowing the possessions of the 
emperor himself (whose abilities as an artist and a speaker 
were also, it was said, being disparaged by his old instructor). 
Nero, they said, was now grown up and it was time for him to 
‘shake off his tutor’. Seneca, warned of this by friends, 
realized his danger and decided to ask the emperor for 
permission to retire from public life. The request was granted 
and the parting was made amicable. 

For the last three years of his life, Seneca devoted himself to 
philosophy and writing, including the Episttdae Morales to 
Lucilius Junior, a native of Pompeii, a hard-working higher 
civil servant (procurator in Sicily at die time) who appears to 
have dabbled in literature and philosophy. Spending hw 
time moving aroimd southern Italy with Paulina, his secon 


12 



INTRODUCTION 


wife, Seneca now rarely visited Rome, and even, to disarm 
suspicion or for greater safety, gave (says Dio) his entire 
fortune to the emperor. Tacitus mentions a story of an 
attempt on his life by poisoning, averted either because a 
slave gave the plot away or because the philosopher was, in 
fear of just such an attack, living on ‘an extremely simple 
diet of fruits growing wild and running water 

Then in a.d. 65 came the disastrous conspiracy against the 
emperor by Piso and others, quite possibly including Seneca. 
There was a report of a sub-conspiracy to kill Piso as well and 
make Seneca emperor - ‘being a man who seemed to be 
marked out for supreme power by the good qualities for 
which he was so famous Many people lost their lives on 
the discovery of the plot. Seneca, like many others, was 
asked to commit suicide, the then prevailing method of 
imperial execution. Tacitus* description of his death is not 
quickly forgotten.^® His brothers and Lucan followed him, 
all by their o-wri hands, in the course of Nero’s Jhenzied purge 
of enemies real and imagined. 

According to some, a true Stoic, like Cato imder the 
Republic, would have stayed on in pohtical Hfe to the bitter 
end. But after the loss of aU his influence over NerO, the 
Spaniard could hardly have hoped to be of useful service any 
longer to the Roman world, and (in an age in which many 
hved in recurrent dread of a capricious emperor’s message 
demanding, obHquely or otherwise, the recipient’s suicide) 
the alternative to his retirement was undoubtedly death. 
Certain other Stoics, indeed, stood up to emperors and were 
rewarded, for their opposition to misrule with martyrdom. 
Seneca chose to spend what time was left to him in philosophy, 
and the reader may be left to decide, in fairness not forgetting 
his chronic ill health, whether his ‘lack of moral courage 
outside the study’ in this or earher events detracts firom his 
achievements. Surprisingly, perhaps, the satirist of the century, 

13 



INTRODUCTION 

Juvenal, does not pick on the difference between this public 
figure s conduct and his pliilosophical professions, of which a 
variety of later writers have made play.^® ‘Sir, are you so 
grossly ignorant of human nature,’ asked Dr Johnson, ‘as 
not to know that a man may be very sincere in good principles 
without having good practice?’ Seneca, all the same, may 
well be liistory s most notable example of a man who failed 
to live up to his principles. 

This does not prevent him firom being the outstanding 
figure of his age. ‘Seneca, in those days unsurpassed both in 
the field of letters and in power (power which afterwards 
grew too great and recoiled upon his own head), was the 
last man to be impressed by things which did not count, 
said his contemporary Pliny.^° Money, power or achieve- 
ments in public Hfe or letters are — despite the interest of the 
httle we know of his career — not the things with which 
Seneca would want to be connected by people coming across 
his name today. That he did not expect to be forgotten we 
know (in one letter he actually promises Lucilius immortality 
through having corresponded with him) ; but what he would 
have liked to be remembered for would have been the value 
of the ideas which, so he tells Lucilius in his eighth letter, he 
was committing to writing in the hope that they might be ‘of 
use to later generations 

SENECA AND PHILOSOPHY 

Stoicism, for centuries the most inffuential philosophy in the 
Graeco-Roman world, had a long history before Seneca. 
Founded by Zeno (bom of Phoenician descent in Cyprus 
c- 336/5 B.c.) who had taught or lectured in a well-known 
stoa (a colonnade or porch) — hence the name - in Athens, it 
had been developed and modified by a succession of thinkers 
whose opinions on various logical, ethical or cosmological 


14 


INTRODUCTION 


questions showed some fair divergencies. As a moral creed, 
however, it was based throughout on the following frame- 
work of belief. 

The Stoics saw the world as a single great community in 
which all men are brothers, ruled by a supreme providence 
which could be spoken of, almost according to choice or 
context, under a variety of names or descriptions including 
the divine reason, creative reason, natiure, the spirit or purpose 
■ of the universe, destiny, a personal god, even (by way of 
concession to traditional religion) ‘the gods’. It is man’s duty 
to live in conformity with the divine will, and this means, 
firstly, bringing his life into line with ‘nature’s laws’, and 
secondly, resigning himself completely and uncomplainingly 
to whatever fate may send him. Only by hving thus, and not 
setting too high a value on things which can at any moment 
be taken away from him, can he discover that true, unshake- 
able peace and contentment to which ambition, luxury and 
above all avarice are among the greatest obstacles. 

Living ‘ in accordance with nature ’ means not only question- 
ing convention and training ourselves to do without all 
except the necessities (plain food, water, basic clothing and 
shelter) but developing the inborn gift of reason which marks 
.us off as different from the animal world. We are meant to 
set free or perfect this rational element, this particle of the 
universal reason, the ‘divine spark’ in our human make-up, so 
that it may campaign against and conquer pain, grief, super- 
stition and the fear of death. It will show us that ‘there’s 
nothing either good or bad but thinking makes it so’, 
discipline the pleasures and the passions, and generally subordi- 
nate the body and emotions to the mind and soul. 

In tlois way we shall arrive at the true end of man, happiness, 
through having attained the one and only good thing in 
life, the ideal or goal called arete in Greek and in Latin virtus - 
for which the English word ‘virtue’ is so unsatisfactory a 

15 



INTRODUCTION 


translation. This, the summiim homim or ‘supreme is 
usually summarized in ancient philosophy as a combination of 
four quahties: wisdom (or moral insight), courage, self- 
control and justice (or upright dealing). It enables a man to be 
‘sclf-suiEcient’, immime to suffering, superior to the wounds 
and upsets of life (often personalized as Fortuna, the goddess 
of fortune). Even a slave thus armed can be called ‘free’, or 
indeed titled ‘a king’ since even a king cannot touch hini. 
Another example of these ‘paradoxes’ for which the Stoics 
were celebrated is one directed at the vanity of worldly 
possessions : ‘ the shortest route to wealth is the contempt of 
wealth.’ 

This ethic, together with its backing in a system of physics 
and logic, had first been given shape in the minds of thinkers 
who, although Greek-speaking, were for the most part not of 
European descent, conung from places in Asia Minor or the 
Levant hke Tarsus, Cyprus, and Babylon. This does not seem 
to have reduced the appeal it made to educated Romans 
when, aroimd the middle of the second century b.c., it first 
came to their notice. The duties it inculcated - courage and 
endmrance, self-control and self-reliance, upright conduct ^d 
just dealing, simple and unluxurious habits, rationality, 
obedience to the state — were self-evident to many Romans, 
corresponding quite closely to the traditional idea of virtus. 
The development of the jus naturae by the Roman jurists 
and Posidonius’ identification of the Stoic world community 
or cosmopoUs with the Roman Empire made its accept^ce 
even easier. At a later date the Stoic view of the ruler ( s 
term including governors, magistrates and admimstrative 
officials)^^ as a man whose actions could be criticized, an 
even as a minister or servant, was to be disliked by emperors, 
some of whom replied by expelling the philosophers . Ut 
Stoics were usually far from hostile to monarchy as sue , 
however openly they declared that rank counted for no g 

l6 


• INTRODUCTION 

against die duty of ail men, whatever their station, to play 
their part in life well. 

Despite its wide acceptance in educated circles, early 
Stoicism had a forbidding aspect which went far to explain 
its failure to influence the masses. There was something un- 
real or ficrional about the sapiens, the wise man or philosopher. 
This ideal figure seemed, from die way the Stoic lecturers 
talked, to have somehow become perfect in some sudden 
transformation long ago; gradual self-improvement was 
hardly discussed. The target it set seemed too high for ordinary 
men. It stifled and repressed ordinary human emotions in 
striving after apatheia, immunity to feeling; Cato, the great 
Stoic saint, is reported to have expressed regret at having 
kissed his wife in a moment of danger. It held that in certain 
circumstances a man’s self-respect might invite, as an act of 
supreme nobility, his suicide. In pursuing the ideal of 
autarkeia, self-sulFiciency, it seemed to make the perfect man 
a person detached and aloof from his fellows, superior to the 
world he Hved in. Altogether the impression it conveyed, for 
all its idealism and sincerity, could be cold, dogmatic and 
unrealistic. Seneca’s contribution to ancient philosophy lay in 
the humanization of this creed, continuing a process begun 
long before in Rhodes and Rome by Panaetius and Posidonius. 

Although Seneca wrote for a relatively narrow circle of 
educated persons (usually addressing his compositions to a 
particular friend or relative as if he were that person’s special 
spiritual adviser) his letters and ^says show a Stoicism more 
closely reconciled with the facts and frailty of human nature. 
The ideal of apatheia is much modified. Self-sufficient though 
he is, the sapiens can now have friends and can grieve, within 
limits, at tlie loss of one. It has become his duty to be kind 
and forgiving towards others, indeed to ‘live for the other 
person’.^^ In his way of living he should avoid being ostenta- 
tiously different from those he tries to win from moral 


17 



INTRODUCTION 

ignorance. He has to battle like the rest against his failings, 
in a long and painful progress towards perfection in which all 
can do with help from above or the inspiration of others’ 
example. Seneca himself, we observe, occasionally makes 
immodest statements concerning his own progress, but is 
capable of humility, as in one description of himself as ‘a 
long way from being a tolerable, let alone a perfect human 
being 

In statements of man’s kinship with a beneficent, even loving 
god and of a belief in conscience as the divinely inspired 
‘inner light of the spirit’, his attitudes are religious beyond 
anything in Roman state religion, in his day little more than 
a withered survival of formal worship paid to a host of 
ancient gods and goddesses. Christian writers have not been 
slow to recognize the remarkably close parallels between 
isolated sentences in Seneca’s writings and verses of the 
Bible. On the other hand the word ‘God’' or ‘the gods 
was used by the philosophers more as a time-honoured and 
convenient expression than as standing for any indispensable 
or even surely identifiable component of the Stoic system. 
And the tendency of Stoicism was always to exalt mans 
importance in the universe rather than to abase him before a 
higher authority. The hope of immortah’ty was occasionally 
held out but Seneca does not play on it. .To him as to most 
Stoics virtue was to be looked on as its own reward and vice 
as its own punishment. The religious hunger of the masses 
of his day was to be met not by philosophy but by the cults 
of Isis and Mithras and Christianity. 

For the ancient world, then, apart from reviving philosophy 
in Latin literature, he ‘spiritualized and humanized 
Stoicism. What of Seneca and modem philosophy? T e 
latter, at least in the universities of the English-speaking 
world, has for some time been set on a course which he would 
certainly have condemned; he would not have understoo 

i8 



INTRODUCTION 


the attention it pays to ordinary language, and some of his 
letters (for example letter XLVni) make it clear that it would 
have come in for a' share of his impatience with philosophers 
(not excluding Stoics) who in his eyes degraded philosophy 
by wasting their time on verbal puzzles or logical hair- 
splitting. But more than this, he would have denounced the 
opinion to which most philosophers, tacitly or otherwise, 
have come roxmd in the last half-century, that it is no part of 
the business of philosophy to turn people into better persons, 
as tantamount to desertion or lese-majeste. His tremendous 
faith in philosophy as a mistress was grounded on a belief 
that her end was the practical one of curing souls, of bringing 
peace and order to the feverish minds of men pursuing the 
wrong aims in life. ‘What we say should be of use, not just 
entertaining.’^”^ Even speculation on the nature or meaning 
of the universe was of secondary importance, something 
which the philosopher might or might not, as he chose, take 
up in leisure moments. A philosopher’s words should (as a 
Quaker might ^ut it) ‘speak to our condition’. Fielding’s 
observation that few people in the position of being ‘over- 
loaded with prosperity or adversity’ could be too wise or 
too foolish not to gain from reading Seneca might have 
gratified him not merely as an indication that his writings 
were proving ‘of use’ to later generations, but also as showing 
that a philosopher could still be regarded as someone to be 
turned to for advice or consolation. To Seneca, as Letter XC 
and other letters plainly show, the philosopher and the wise 
man were the same person. . 

Whether or not his letters may still be turned to for their 
pointers to the contented life, they cannot be read without 
noticing how far in advance of their time are many of his 
ideas - on the shows in the arena,' for example, or the treat- 
ment of slaves. His implicit belief in the equality and brother- 
hood of man despite dl barriers of race or class or rank, was 


19 



INTRODUCTION 


onfe, resurrected from the days of the early Stoics, which led 
directly to great improvements in the legal position of slaves; 
besides explaining the then remarkable attitude towards 
slaves expressed in Letter XLVUi the belief was also the 
germ of the notion of natural law, the law which was thought 
to transcend national boundaries and form a basis for the 
validity of international law. These elements of Stoicism 
made their not so small or indirect contribution to the French 
and American revolutions. 


SENECA AND LITERATURE 
His letters and other writings 

‘Seneca,’ Quintilian tells us, ‘turned his hand to practically 
everything which can be made the subject of study - speeches, 
poems, letters, dialogues all surviving.’ Much of this is lost, 
including all his speeches (political and forensic), a biography of 
his father, and essays or treatises on marriage, superstition 
and a variety of other subjects, mainly scientific. 

The works remaining to us (apart from brief poems or 
epigrams whose attribution to Seneca is sometimes doubtful) 
are of two main kinds. There are, first, the philosophical 
letters and essays, including treatises with such titles as The 
Happy Life, The Shortness of Life, Providence, Anger, Clemency, 
Problems in Natural Science znd literary consolationes to persons 
in bereavement. And secondly there are the tragedies, prob- 
ably never staged and intended only for reading or recitation 
among a relatively small circle.^® 

The' one hxmdred and twenty four letters to Lucilius 
comprise something entirely new in literature. For in these, 
which were his most conspicuous and immediate literary 
success, Seneca if anyone is the founder of the Essay. ^ 
Francis Bacon put it to Prince Henry in the dedication of 


20 


INTRODUCTION 


own Essays: ‘The word is late, but the tiling is auncient. For 
Senecaes Epistles to Lucilius, yf one marke them well, are 
but Essaies, that is, dispersed Meditacions, thoughe conveyed 
in the forme of Epistles.’ The Epistulae Morales are essays in 
disguise. It has been said^® that they were real letters edited 
for publication. It seems most likely that they were intended 
from the first for publication, possibly preceded by an interval 
of private circulation. No replies have come down to us. 

The atmosphere varies from that of hvely, not to say 
colloquial, conversation to that of the serious treatise; it is 
occasionally raised to higher levels,"’'® but generally remains 
informal. The ‘teaching’ is generously eclectic; the first 
thirty letters each contain some quotation from or reference 
to writings of the main rival philosophical school, the 
Epicureans. The introduction of imaginary queries or objec- 
tions (often scathing in tone) from the correspondent or 
another inter] ector and the frequent and urgent exhortation 
of the listener to self-improvement suggest the atmosphere of 
the diatribe, while confidences about the writer’s own charac- 
ter and the not uncommon choice of consolation or friendship 
as a theme serve to keep up the air of the letter. Personal 
happenings or surroundings are regularly made the occasion 
of, or the preUminary to, serious reflections in the abstract. 
There are also biting condemnations of ways of life around 
the writer, particularly among the bored and pleasure-seeking 
Roman aristocracy. Room is foimd too for culture, in an 
assimilable form, in balanced discussions of time-honoured 
philosophical or ethical problems,"’'^ or in the development of 
thoughts on, for example, poetry, or physical phenomena, or 
style. 


* 


21 



INTRODUCTION 


His Style 

Style, with Seneca, is of considerable importance. Notvwth- 
standing his own condemnation'"^ of people who give less 
attention to what they have to say than to how they will say 
It, e is a signal example of a writer to whom form mattered 
^ much as content. In writers like him (in what has commonly 
een called the Silver Age of Latin literature), constant 
striving after terseness and originality of expression gave rise 
to an arresting and not easily digested style. 

There were reasons for the development of this ^pointed’ 
style. With the passing of the Republic and succession of a 
^ries of suspicious emperors there had been a diminution 
both in the range of subject-matter which was safe and in the 
practical value of a training in rhetoric for a career in puhhe 
life. The leisured Roman (now increasingly over-leisured) 
turned his training to hterary rather than political ends; and 
the means to the prime new end of styh’stic brilliance were 
those of rhetoric. All this was encouraged by the fashion of 
giving pubhc readings of one’s work, in which success almost 
came to be measured by the ability of each and every sen- 
tence to win applause. Carried over, too, from the schools of 
rhetoric was a liking for sometimes daringly poetic words, 
especially from Virgil, and artificial forms of expression more 
typical of verse than prose. 

Going with the overriding aim of pithiness or epigrammatic 
brevity (contrasting so greatly with the style of Cicero a 
century before) was an indulgence in colloguiahsms. Seneca’s 
use of popular turns of phrase and everyday expressions (a 
practice rare in Roman authors not writing for the comic 
stage or on techmeal subjects) and deliberate cultivation of the 
easy, conversational manner are somehow reconciled with 
elements of style, even in the Letters, which to us seem highly 


22 


INTRODUCTION 


wrought and polished. The exploitation of such figures as 
antithesis, alliteration, homeoteleuta and all manner of other 
plays upon words, paradox and oxymoron, apposition and 
asyndeton, the use of cases and prepositions in uncommon 
connotations, all contribute to the twin aims of brevity and 
sparkle. 

The result may read more natiurally in Latin than it ever 
could in English, hut is none the less apt to leave the reader 
‘dazzled and fatigued All the wealth and ingenuity of 
epigram and illustration does not prevent us from feeling that 
the sentences often simply ‘repeat the same thought, clothed 
in constantly different guises, over and over again’, as Pronto 
complained in the century following. And this reluctance, as 
it appears, to say what one has to say and then have done with 
it instead of continuing the restless manufacture of yet bolder, 
more hard-hitting or more finished sentences or proverbs, 
sometimes arouses the impatience of more modern readers. 
There is Macaulay’s celebrated statement in a letter to a 
friend: ‘I cannot bear Seneca . , . His works are made up of 
mottoes. There is hardly a sentence which might not be 
quoted; but to read him straightforward is like dining on 
nothing but anchovy sauce.’ Quintilian'^*’’ considered that 
Seneca, whom by and large he respected and admired, 
weakened the force of hk teaching by his manner of writing, 
and others have wondered whedier his style is not imwortliy 
of his subject. 

It is interesting- to hear Quintilian speaking of his struggle 
to win his students away from such models as Seneca (who, 
he said, ‘practically alone among autliors was to be found on 
die shelves of every young man at that time’). As an academi- 
cian who stood for orthodoxy and a return to die older or 
Ciceronian manner, he could not bring liimsclf to give die 
seal of his approval to an author whose vTiting showed, in 
his opinion, ‘a degree of cormption all the more dangerous 

23 


INTRODUCTION 

through^ the very attractiveness of the faults in which it 
abounds , and who had actually voiced the heresy; ‘There 
are no fixed rules of style. 


★ 

His influence and appeal 

While scholars and schoolmasters in the century following 
continued to condemn"^® Seneca, early Christians were taking 
to this kindred spirit among pagan writers, so many of whose 
ideas and attitudes they felt able to adopt or share. Anthologies 
were made of him and he was frequently quoted by such 
writers as Jerome, Lactantius and Augustine. TertuUian 
called him saepe uoster, ‘often one of us’. The extant set of 
letters purporting to be correspondence between Seneca and 
St Paul (probably composed by a Christian, but apparently 
believed genuine until quite modem times) led Jerome to 
include him in his so called Catalogue of Saints, and no doubt 
helps to explain his reputation in the middle ages, much as 
the supposed prophecy of the birth of the Messiah in Virgil’s 
Fourth Eclogue helped to make the latter’s name in Christen- 
dom. 

Only Cicero, perhaps, among classical authors was better 
known in medieval times, and until Aristotle was rediscovered 
by Western Europe, Seneca’s main ‘scientific’ work, the 
Natiirales Qiiaestiones, was the undisputed authority on the 
subjects with which it dealt. Dante, Chaucer and Petrarch 
were great admirers and quoters of his writings.^'^ Printing 
spread his influence, the first printed version of the Epistulae 
being published in or about 1475 at Rome, Paris and Stras- 
bourg. Erasmus‘S® was the first person to produce a critical 
edition (in 1515) and Calvin’s first work was an edition m 
1532 of the De dementia, an essay originally written to 


24 


INTRODUCTION 


encourage clemency in Nero, and incidentally inspiring much 
of the ‘quality of inerc)^’ speech in die Merchant of Venice. 

Montaigne‘S^ was the first, and the most conspicuously 
indebted, borrower from Seneca among the great modem 
htcrary figures. Pasquier’s admiration for Montaigne prompted 
him to say; ‘As for his essays, which I call masterpieces, 
there is no book in my possession which I have so greatly 
cherished. I always find sometliing in it to please me. It is a 
French Seneca.’ 

Appreciations of Seneca as a moralist may be quoted from 
many sources. John of Salisbury is supposed to have said: ‘If 
Quintilian will excuse my saying so, there arc very few if any 
writers on conduct among non-Christians w^hose words and 
ideas can be more readily applied to all kinds of practical 
things.’ Emerson urged: ‘Make your own Bible. Select and 
collect all the words and sentences that in all your reading 
have been to you like the blast of triumph out of Shakespeare, 
Seneca, Moses, Jolin and Paul.’ He is placed in even more 
exalted company by Baudelaire in liis essay De I’Essence du 
Rire, in which he seems at one point to be ascribing modem 
civilized manners to ‘la venue de Jesus, Platon et Seneque 
aidant'. In letters to Peter Gillcs we find Erasmus writing {in 
the words of Froude) ‘ in fraternal good humour, advising him 
to be regular at his work, to keep a journal, to remember that 
life was short, to smdy Plato and Seneca, love his wife, and 
disregard the world’s opinion’. Queen Elizabeth I ‘did much 
admire Seneca’s wholesome advisings’, says her godson, Sir 
John Harington, who ‘saw much of her translating thereof 
Although great literary figures 'have usually been fondest of 
the letters, it was his plays which, with all their faults, had the 
greatest effect on European literature. ‘If you seek Seneca’s 
memorial, look round on the tragic stage of England, France 
andltaly.’^^ 

The late Elizabethan age and early seventeenth century 



INTRODUCTION 

were the high-water mark of Seneca’s influence, as a writer 
well known and imitated among lyric poets and essayists 
as well as dramatists.^^ His popularity lasted for some time in 
France, where his admirers included Descartes, Corneille, 
La Fontaine, Poussin, Rousseau, Diderot, Balzac arid Sainte- 
Beuve, but disappeared almost altogether in England. The 
enthusiasm of, for example, De Quincey (‘A nobler master 
of thinking Paganism has not to shew, nor, when the cant 
of criticism has done its worst, a more brilliant master of 
composition’) is exceptional, and Seneca, at the present time, 
may be called a forgotten author. 

NOTE ON TRANSLATION AND TEXT 

Translations, and the aims and methods (when they are 
venturesome enough to profess them) of individual trans- 
lators, are seldom hard to criticize. But however far men of 
letters may find themselves from agreement on the principles 
of translation fiom a classical author, the intelligent reader can 
no longer be satisfied with either a literal rendering - on the 
painful model of the old-fashioned school crib - or an in- 
spired paraphrase - however attractive the result has some- 
times been when poet has rendered poet. Somewhere between 
these two kinds of offering lies the ideal translation, the aim 
of which I should define as the exact reproduction of the 
original without omission or addition, capturing its sound 
(form, style) as well as its sense (content, meaning). 

Reproduction of the style presents, except with ordinary 
conversational or colloquial prose, formidable problems. The 
practitioner feels that the attempt is one which should be 
made, even, in the case of poetry, with so difficult a feature or 
it as its metrical patterns. Yet the result must never be 
English so unnatural or contrived (unless the original itself 
clearly set out to obtain such effects) that the reader cannot 

26 



INTRODUCTION 


stomnch it. And this consideration lias tempered my feeling 
tliat die brevity or rhetoric or odier elements of Seneca’s 
manner should each be closely imitated. It is hardly possible, 
for instance, to reproduce the compression of such a sentence 
as Habere cripitury habuissc uumquam or Magis qiiis veneris 
quain quo interest. In diis field of style it is never possible to 
claim that a translation ‘loses nothing’ of the qualities of the 
original. 

For -when all is said and done a translation of a literary work 
must be readable. To spare the reader the jars which remind 
him that he is reading a translation, all but the few timeless 
versions of die classical authors need to be revised or done 
afresh perhaps every half century. The same principle inci- 
dentally suggests that obsairities (allusions, for example, 
which only a Latinist would notice or appreciate) may be 
clarified or removed by slight expansion, and I have adopted 
this practice very occasionally as an alternative to a distracting 
reference to a note. 

The formal beginning and ending of each letter [Seneca 
Lucilio suo salutem and Vale) is omitted. Colloquialisms 
(including the forms ‘it’s’, ‘wouldn’t’, etc. and the everyday 
habit of ending sentences with prepositions) will be noticed 
here and there; they have been used only where Seneca’s 
language is thoroughly colloquial or where he is arguing in 
the second person with an imaginary interjector. 

If an earlier translator has hit on a phrase which one 
becomes (tmwillingly) convinced cannot be bettered, it is 
surely absurd - the more so if one believes that there is almost 
always only one best rendering in the language of the trans- 
lator’s day - to proceed with a poorer or less accurate one 
merely for the sake of originality. I am indebted in this way 
in a number of places to Gummere and Barker, the transr 
lators in the Loeb (1917-25) and Clarendon Press (1932) 
versions respectively. 


27 



INTRODUCTION 

The translation, originally based on Beltrami’s text (1931), 
has been brought into line with the Oxford Classical Text 
(1965) of Mr L. D. Reynolds, to whom I am grateful for help 
on several points of difficulty. My appreciation is extended 
also to various friends who may not well recall the help or 
interest and encouragement at one time or another given by 
them, and among them to my former tutors Mr T. C. W. 
Stinton and Mr J. P, V. D. Balsdon, who have rescued me 
from a number of heresies in the parts of this work which 
they have seen. My thanks arc due also to Dr Adichacl Grant 
for permission to reprint from The Annah of Imperial Rome 
(Penguin Books, 1956) his translation of Tacitus’ account of 
Seneca’s death. 

It may be asked what criteria-have been applied in deciding 
which letters should be included or omitted. The first has 
been their interest - as they set out a philosophy and contribute 
to a picture of a man and of his times. The second has been 
the avoidance of undue repetition of particular themes or 
topics of a moralist who tends towards repetitiveness. For 
similar reasons one or two of the letters have been shortened 
by the omission of a few passages (at places indicated). My 
ultimate defence must be the anthologist’s plea, or confession, 
that the choice has been a personal one. 


POSTSCRIPT TO INTRODUCTION 

It is perhaps hard to resist quoting here (in no way seeking to 
disarm criticism!) from the preface and postscript to the 
anthology Seneca’s Morals by Way of Abstract published by 
Sir Roger L’jEstrange in 1673 : 

Some other Man, in my Place, would perchance, make you twenty 
Apologies, for his want of Skill, and Addrejs, in governing t 's 
Affair, but theje arc Formal, and Pedantique Fooleries: As if any Man 

28 


INTRODUCTION 


tihat firjt takes himjelf for a Coxcomb in his own Heart, would 
afterwards make himjelf one in Print too. This Abf tract, sucli as it is, 
you are extremely welcome to; and I am Jorry it is no better, both 
for your Jakes and my own: for if it were written up to the Spirit of 
the Original, it would be one of the mojt valuable Prejents that ever 
any private Man bejtow’d upon the Publick: 

Books, and Dijhes have this Common Fate; there mas never any One, 
Either of them, that pleas'd All Palates. And, in Truth, it is a Thing 
little to be Wijh’d for, as Expected; For, an Univerfal Applaufe is at 
leaft Two Thirds of a Scandal. So that though I deliver up thefe Papers 
to the Prefs, I invite no Man to the Reading of them: And, whofoever 
Reads, and Repents; it is his Own Fault. To Conclude, as I made this 
Compofition Principally for my Self, fo it agrees exceedingly Well with My 
Conftitution; and yet, if any Man has a Mind to take part with me, he 
has Free Leave, and Welcome. But, let him Carry this Confideration along 
with him, that He’s a very Unmannerly Guejt, that prejjes upon 
another Bodies Table, and then Quarrels with his Dinner. 


a ^ 




LETTERS 




LETTER II 


Judging from, what you tell me and from what I hear, I 
feel that you show great promise. You do not tear from place 
to place and unsettle yourself wdth one move after another. 
Restlessness of diat sort is symptomatic of a sick mind. 
Nothing, to my way of tliinking, is a better proof of a well 
ordered mind than a man’s ability to stop just where he is 
and pass some time in his own company. 

Be careful, however, that tliere is no element of discursive- 
ness and desultorincss about tliis reading you refer to, this 
reading of many different autliors and books of every des- 
cription. You should be extending your stay among writers 
whose genius is unquestionable, deriving constant nourish- 
ment from them if you \\dsh to gain anything from your 
reading that will frnd a lasting place in yoiur mind. To be 
everywhere is to be nowhere. People who spend their whole 
life travelling abroad end up having plenty of places where 
they can fmd hospitality but no real friendships. The same 
must needs be the case with people who never set about 
acquiring an intimate acquaintanceship with any one great 
writer, but skip from one to another, paying flying visits to 
them all. Food that is vomited up as soon as it is eaten is not 
assimilated into the body and does not do one any good; 
notlung hinders a cure so much as frequent changes of treat- 
ment; a woxmd will not heal over if it is being made the 
subject of experiments with different ointments; a plant 
which is frequently, moved never grows strong. Nothing is so 
useful that it can be of any service in the mere passing. A 
multitude of books only gets in one’s way. So if you are 
unable to read all the books in yovu: possession, you have 
enough when you have all the books you are able to read. 

33 ' . 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 21,4 

if you say, ‘But I feel like opening different books at 
different times , my answer will be this: tasting one dish 
after another is the sign of a fussy stomach, and where the 
foods are dissimilar and diverse in range they lead to con- 
tamination of the system, not nutrition. So always read well- 
tried authors, and if at any moment you find yourself wanting 

a change from a particular author, go back to ones you have 
read before. 

Bach day, to o, a cquire something which will help you, to 
face poverty, o r death, and other ills as well. After running 
over a lot of different thoughts, pick out one to be digested 
thoroughly that day. This is what I do myself; out of the many 
bits I have been reading I lay hold of one. My thought for 
today is something which I found in Epicurus (yes, I actually 
make a practice of going over to the enemy’s camp— by way of 
reconnaissance, not as a deserter!), ‘A cheerful poverty,’ he 
says, is an honourable state.’ But if it is cheerful it is not 
poverty at aU. It is not the man who has too little who is 
poor, but the one who hankers after more. What difference 
does it make how much there is laid away in a man’s safe or 
in his bams, how many head of stock he grazes or how much 
capital he puts out at interest, if he is always after what is 
another’s and only counts what he has yet to get, never what 
he has already. You ask what is the proper limit to a person’s 
wealth? First, having what is essential, and second, havin g 
what is enough. 


LETTER III 

You have sent me a letter by the hand of a ‘friend’ of yours, 
as you call him. And in the next sentence you warn me to 
avoid discussing your affairs freely vrith him, since you are 

34 


LETTER III 


in, 4 

not even in the habit of doing so yourself; in other words 
you have described him as being a friend and then denied 
this in one and the same letter. Now if you were using that 
word in a kind of popular sense and not according to its 
strict meaning, and calling him a ‘friend’ in much the same 
way as we refer to candidates as ‘gentlemen’ or hail someone 
with the greeting ‘my dear fellow’ if when we meet him his 
name sHps our memory, we can let this pass. But if you are 
looking on anyone as a friend when you do not trust him as 
you trust yourself, you are making a grave mistake, and have 
failed to grasp sufficiently the full force of true friendship; 

. Certainly you should discuss everything with a friend; but 
before you do so, discuss in your mind the man himself. 
After friendship is formed you must trust, but before that 
you must judge. Those people who, contrary to Theophrastus’ 
advice. Judge a man after they have made him their friend 
instead of the other way round, certainly put the cart before 
the horse. Think for a long time whether or not you should 
admit a given person to your friendship. But when you have 
decided to do so, welcome him heart and soul, and speak as 
unreservedly with him as you would with yourself. You 
should, I need hardly say, live in such a way that there is 
nothing which you could not as easily tell your enemy as 
keep to yourself; but seeing that certain matters do arise on 
which convention decrees silence, the things you should 
share with your friend are all your worries and deliberations. 
Regard him as loyal, and you will make him loyal .^Some 
men’s fear of being deceived has taught people tp de ceive 
them; by their suspiciousness they give them the right to do 
me wrong thing by them . Why should I keep back anything 
wim I’m with a friend? Why shouldn’t I imagine I’m alone 
when I’m in his company? 

There are certain people who tell any person they meet 
things that should only be confided to friends, imburdening 

35 


m,4 


letters prom a stoic 4 

themselves of whatever is on their minds into any ear thL' 
please. Others again are shy of confiding in their closest 
friends, and would not even let themselves, if they could help 
It into the secrets they keep hidden deep down inside them- 
se ves. e s ou d do neither. Trusting everyone is as much a 
tauit as trusting no one (though I should call the first the 
worthier and the second the safer behaviour). 

. ^^'^I^rly, people who never relax and people who are 
invanably in a relaxed state merit your disapproval - the 
former as much as the latter. For a delight in bustling about 
IS not industry - it is only the restless energy of a hunted 
iMn . And the state of mind that looks on all activity as 
tiresome is not true repose, but a spineless inertia. This 
prompts me to memorize something which I came across in 
Pompomus. Some men have shrunk so far into dark comers 
at objects in bright daylight seem quite blurred to them.' 

A balanced combination of the two attitudes is what we 
want, the active man should be able to take things easily, 
while the man who is inclined towards repose should be 
capable of action. Ask nature: she will tell you that she made 
both day and night. 


LETTER V 

I VI3EW With pleasure and approval the way you keep on at 
your studies and sacrifice everything to your single-minded 
efforts to make yourself every day a better man. I do not 
merely urge you to persevere in this; I actually implore you 
to. Let me give you, though, this one piece of advice: re- 
frain from following the example of those whose craving is 
for attention, not their own improvement, by doing certain 

36 



LETTER V 


V,S 

things which are calailated to give rise to comment on your 
appearance or way of living generally. Avoid shabby attire, 
long hair, an unkempt beard, an outspoken dislike of silver- 
ware, sleeping on die ground and all other misguided means 
to self-advertisement. The very name of pliilosophy, how- 
ever modest the mamier in which it is pursued, is unpopular 
enough as it is: imagine what the reaction would be if we 
started dissociating ourselves from the conventions of society. 
Inwardly everything should be diiferent but our outward 
face should conform with the crowd. Our clodies should not 
be gaudy, yet diey should not be dowdy eidier. We should 
not keep silver plate vdth inlays of solid gold, but at the same 
time we should not imagine diat doing without gold and 
silver is proof that we are leading the simple life. Let our 
aim be a way of life not diametrically opposed to, but better 
than tliat of the mob. Otherwise we shall repel and alienate 
the very people whose reform we desire; we shall make 
them, moreover, reluctant to imitate us in anything for fear 
they may have to imitate us in everything. The first thing 
philosophy promises us is the feeling of fellowship, of belong- 
ing to mankind and being members of a commimity; being 
different will mean the abandoning of that manifesto. We 
must watch that the means by which we hope to gain admira- 
tion do not earn ridicule and hostility. Our motto, as every- 
one knows, is to live in conformity with nature: it is quite 
contrary to nature to torture one’s body, to reject simple 
standards of cleanliness and make a point of being dirty, to 
adopt a diet that is not just plain but hideous and revolting. 
In the same way as a craving for dainties is a token of extrava- 
gant living, avoidance of familiar and inexpensive dishes 
betokens insanity. Philosophy calls for simple living, not for 
doing penance, and the simple way of life need not be a 
crude one. The standard which I accept is this: one’s life 
should be a compromise between the ideal and the popular 

37 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC V,5 

morality. People should admire oiu: way of life but they 
should at the same time fmd it understandable. 

‘Does that mean we arc to act just like other people? Is 
there to be no distinction between us and them?’ Most 
certainly there is. Any close observer should be aware that 
we are different from the mob. Anyone entering our homes 
should admire us rather than our furnishings. It is a great 
man that can treat his earthenware as if it was silver, and a 
man who treats his silver as if it was earthenware is no less 
great. Finding wealth an intolerable burden is the mark of an 
unstable mind. 

But let me share with you as usual the day’s small find 
(which today is something that I noticed in the Stoic writer 
Hecato). Limiting one’s desires actually helps to cure one of 
fear. ‘Cease to hope,’ he says, ‘and you will cease to fear. 
‘But how,’ you will ask, ‘can things as diverse as these he 
linked?’ Well, the fact is, Lucilius, that they are bound up 
with one another, unconnected as they may seem. Widely 
different though they are, the two of them march in unison 
like a prisoner and the escort he is handcuffed to. Fear keeps 
pace with hope. Nor does dieir so moving together surprise 
me; both belong to a mind in suspense, to a mind in a state 
of anxiety through looking into the future. Both are mainly 
due to projecting our thoughts far ahead of us instead o 
adapting ourselves to the present. Thus it is that foresight, 
the greatest blessing humanity has been given, is transforme 
into a curse. Wild animals run from the dangers they actual y 
see, and once they have escaped them worry no more. We 
however arc tormented alike by what is past and what is to 
come. A number of our blessings do us harm, for memory 
brings back the agony of fear while foresight brings it on 
prematurely. No one confines his unhappiness to the present. 


38 



LETTER VI 


VI, 4 


I SEE in myself, Lucilius, not just an improvement but a 
transformation, although I would not venture as yet to 
assure you, or even to hope, that there is nothing left in me 
needing to be changed. Naturally there are a lot of things 
about me requiring to be built up or fmed down or eliminated. 
Even this, the fact that it perceives the failings it was unaware 
of in itself before, is evidence of a change for the better in 
one’s character. In the case of some sick people it is a matter 
for congratulation when .they come to reali2e for themselves 
that diey are sick. 

I should very much like, then, to share this all so sudden 
metamorphosis of mine with you. Doing so would make me 
start to feel a surer faith in the friendship that exists between 
us, that true friendship which not hope nor fear nor concern 
for personal advantage ever sunders, that friendship in which 
and for which people are ready to die. I can give you plenty, 
of examples of people who have not been lacking a friend 
but friendship, something that can never happen when 
mutual inclination draws two personalities together in a 
fellowship of desire for all that is honourable. Why cannot it 
happen? Because they know that everything - and especially 
their setbacks - is shared between them. 

You can’t imagine how much of an alteration I see each 
day bringing about in me. ‘Send me, too,’ you will be saying, 
the things you’ve found so effectual.’ Indeed I desire to 
transfer every one of them to you; part of my joy in learning 
is that it puts me in a position to teach; nothing, however 
outstanding and however helpful, will ever give me any 
pleasure if the knowledge is to be for my benefit alone. If 
tvisdom were offered me on the one condition that I should 


39 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC VI, 4 

keep it shut away and not divulge it to anyone, I should 
reject it. There is no enjoying the possession of anything 
valuable unless one has someone to share it with. I shall send 
you, accordingly, the actual books themselves, and to save 
you a lot of trouble hunting all over the place for passages 
likely to be of use to you, I shall mark the passages so that 
you can turn straight away to the words I approve and admire. 

Personal converse, though, and daily intimacy with some- 
one will be of more benefit to you than any discourse. You 
should really be here and on the spot, firstly because people 
believe their eyes rather more than their ears, and secondly 
because the road is a long one if one proceeds by way of 
precepts but short and effectual if by way ofpersonal example. 
Cleanthes would never have been the image of Zeno if he 
had merely heard him lecture; he lived with him, studied his 
private life, watched him to see if he lived in accordance with 
his own principle. Plato, Aristotle and a host of other philo- 
sophers all destined to take different paths, derived more 
from Socrates’ character than from his words. It was not 
Epicurus’ school but living under the same roof as Epicurus 
that turned Metrodorus, Hermarchus and Polyaenus into 
great men. And yet I do not sunmion you to my side solely 
for the sake of your own progress but for my own as well, 
for we shall be of the utmost benefit to each other. 

Meanwhile, since I owe you the daily allowance. I’ll tell 
you what took my fancy in the writings of Hecato today. 
‘What progress have I made? I am beginning to be my own 
friend.’ That is progress indeed. Such a person will never be 
alone, and you may be sure he is a friend of all. 


40 


vn,3 


LETTER VII 

You ask me to say what you should consider it particularly 
important to avoid. My answer is this: a mass crowd. It is 
something to which you cannot entrust yourself yet without 
risk. I at any rate am ready to confess my own frailty in this 
respect. I never come back home with quite the same moral 
character I went out with; something or odier becomes im- 
settled where I had achieved internal peace, some one or 
other of the thhigs I had put to flight reappears on the scene. 
We who are recovering from a prolonged spiritual sickness 
are in the same condition as invalids who have been affected 
to such an extent by prolonged indisposition that they cannot 
once be taken out of doors without iU effects. Associating 
with people in large numbers is actually harmful: there is 
not one of them that will not make some vice or other 
attractive to us, or leave us carrying the imprint of it or 
bedaubed all unawares with it. And inevitably enough, the 
larger the size of the crowd we mingle with, the greater the 
danger. But nothing is as ruinous to the character as sitting 
away one’s time at a show - for it is then, through the medium 
of entertainment, that vices creep into one with more than 
usual ease. What do you take me to mean? That I go home 
more selfish, more self-seeking and more self-indulgent? 
Yes, and what is more, a person crueller and less humane 
through having been in contact with human beings. I hap- 
pened to go to one of_these shows at the time of the lunch-hour 
interlude, expecting there to be some light and witty enter- 
tainment then, some respite for the purpose of affording 
people’s eyes a rest from human blood. Far from it. AU the 
earlier contests were charity in comparison. The nonsense is 
dispensed with now: what we have now is murder pure and 

41 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC Vir,3 

Simple. The combatants have nothing to protect them; their 
whole bodies are exposed to the blows; every thrust they 
iaunch gets home. A great many spectators prefer this to the 
ordma^ matches and even to tlie special, popular demand 
ones. And quite naturaUy. There are no helmets and no 
^ ^ weapons. What is the point of armour? 

Or of skill? All that sort of thing just makes the death slower 
m commg. In the morning men are thrown to the hons and 
j" ^ spectators they are thrown to in the 

t spectators insist that each on killing his man 

s e own against another to be killed in his turn; and 
the eventual victor is reserved by them for some other form 
o utc ery, the only exit for the contestants is death. Fire 
and steel keep the slaughter going. And all this happens 
while the arena is virtually empty. 

But he was a highway robber, he killed a man.' And what 
o it? Granted that as a murderer he deserved this punishment, 
what have you done, you wretched fellow, to deserve to 
watch it? Kill him ! Flog him I Bum him ! Why does he run 
at t e other man s weapon in such a cowardly way? Why 
isn t he less half-hearted about killing? Why isn’t he a bit 
more enthusiastic about dying? Whip him forward to get 
his woimds! Make them each offer the other a bare breast 
md trade blow for blow on them.’ And when there is an 
interval in the show: ‘Let’s have some throats cut in the 
meantime, so that there s something happening I ’ Come now, 
people realize — if you realize nothing else - 
that bad examples have a way of recoiling on those who set 
them? Give thanks to the immortal gods that the men to 
whom you are giving a lesson in cruelty are not in a position 
to profit from it. 

When a mind is impressionable and has none too firm n 
hold on what is right, it must be rescued from the crowd: 
it is so easy for it to go over to the my'ority. A Socrates, a 


42, 


vn, 10 


LETTER VII 


Cato or a Laclius might have been shaken in his principles by a 
multiuidc of people different from himself: sucli is tlie measure 
of the inability of any of us, even as we perfect our personality’s 
adjustment, to withstand tlie onset of vices when they come 
with such a mighty following. A single example of extrava- 
gance or greed does a lot of harm - an intimate who leads a 
pampered life gradually makes one soft and flabby; a wealtliy 
neighbour provokes cravings in one; a companion widi a 
malicious nature tends to rub off some of his rust even on 
someone of an innocent and open-hearted nature - what 
then do you imagine the effect on a person’s character is 
when the assault comes from the world at large? You must 
inevitably either hate or imitate tlie world. But the fight 
thing is to shun both courses: you should neither become like 
tlie bad because they are many, nor be an enemy of tlie many 
because they are luilikc you. Retire into yourself as much as 
you can. Associate with people who arc likely to improve 
you. 'Welcome those whom you arc capable of improving. 
The process is a mutual one: men learn as they teach. And 
there is no reason why any pride in advertising your talents 
abroad should lure you forward into the public eye, inducing 
you to give readings of your works or deliver lectures. I 
should be glad to see you doing that if what you had to offer 
them was suitable for the crowd I have been talking about: 
but the fact is, not one of them is really capable of under- 
standing you. You might perhaps come across one here and 
there, but even they would need to be trained and developed 
by you to a point where they could grasp yoiir teaching. ‘For 
whose benefit, then, did I learn it all?’ If it was for your own 
benefit that you learnt it you have no call to fear that your 
trouble may have been wasted. 

just to make sure that I have not been learning solely for 
my own benefit today, let me share with you three fine 
quotations I have come across, each concerned with some- 


43 



vn, 10 


letters from a stoic VI,, iu 

Ac usual debt so far as Ais letter is concerned, Ld the o Act 
you are to regard as an advance on account, ‘To me/ 
says Democritus, a single man is a crowd, and a crowd is a 
ingle man. Equally good is the answer given by the person, 
whoever it was (his identity is uncertain), who when asked 
what was the object of all the trouble he took over a piece of 
CTa tsmaiB 'p when it would never reach more than a very 
ew pcop c, replied. A few is enough for me; so is one; and 
so is none. The tliird is a nice expression used by Epicurus 
in a ettcr to one of his colleagues. ‘I am writing this,’ he 
says, not or the eyes of the many, but for yours alone: for 
oac o us is audience enough for the other.’ Lay these up in 
3 ^ur cart, my dear Lucilius, that you may scorn the pleasure 
at conms from the majority’s approval. The many speak 
g y of you, but have you really any grounds for satis- 
faction with yourself if you arc the kind of person the many 
un erstand? Your merits should not be outward facing. 


LETTER VIII 

Are you, of all people’, you write, ‘really telling me to 
avoid the crowd, to retire from the world and find content- 
ment in a good conscience? Where are those Stoic rules of 
yours that call on a man to die in harness?’ Come now, do I 
really give you the impression that I advocate a life of in- 
activity? I have only buried myself away behind closed doors 
in order to be able to be of use to more people. With me no 
day is ever whiled .away at ease. I claim a good part of my 
nights for study; I have no time for sleep: I just succumb to it, 
keeping my eyes at their work when they are heavy-lidded 
and exhausted from lack of rest. I have withdrawn from affairs 


44 



LETTER VIII 


vra,5 

as well as from society, and from my own affairs in particular: 

I am acting on behalf of later generations. I am writing down 
a few things that may be of use to them; I am committing to 
writing some helpful recommendations, which might be 
compared to the formulae of successful medications, the 
effectiveness of which I have experienced in the case of my 
own sores, which may not have been completely cured but 
have at least ceased to spread. I am pointing out to others the 
right path, which I have recognized only late in life, when I 
am worn out with my wanderings. ‘Avoid,’ I cry, ‘whatever 
is approved of by the mob, and things that are the gift of 
chance. Whenever circumstance brings some welcome thing 
your way, stop in suspicion and alarm: wild animals and fish 
alike are taken in by this or that inviting prospect. Do you 
look on them as presents given you by fortime? They are 
snares. Anyone among you who wishes to lead a secure life 
will do his very best to steer well wide of these baited bounties, 
which comprise yet another instance of the errors we miser- 
able creattures fall into: we think these tilings are ours when ' 
in fact it is we who are caught. That track leads to precipices; 
life on that giddy level ends in a fall. Once, moreover, 
prosperity begins to carry us off course, we are no more 
capable even of bringing the ship to a standstill than of going 
down with the consolation that she has been held on her course, 
or of going down once and for all ; fortune does not just 
capsize the boat: she hurls it headlong on the rocks and 
dashes it to pieces. Cling, therefore, to this sound and whole- 
some plan of life: indulge the body just so far as suffices for 
good health. It needs to be treated somewhat strictly to 
prevent it from being disobedient to the spirit. Your food 
should appease your hunger, your drink quench yotu thirst, 
your clothing keep out the cold, your house be a protection 
against inclement weather. It makes no difference whether 
It is built of truf or of variegated marble imported from another 


45 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC m5 

country: what you have to understand is that thatch makes a 
person just as good a roof as gold does. Spurn everything 
that is added on by way of decoration and display by un- 
necessary labour. Reflect that nothing merits admiration 
except the spirit, the impressiveness of which prevents it 
from being impressed by anything.’ 

If these are the things I’m saying to myself) if these are the 
things I m saying to future generations, don’t you think I’m 
doing more good dian when I go into coiurt to enter into a 
recognizance on someone’s behalf, or stamp my seal on a will, 
or lend my assistance by word or action in the Senate to some 
candidate for office? Those who appear inactive are, believe 
me, engaged in far more important activity; they’re dealing 
with matters divine and human at the same moment. 

But the time has come to make an end, and in accordance 
with the practice I’ve started to make some disbursement on 
this letter’s behalf For this I shall not draw on my own re- 
sources. I m stiU turning over the pages of Epicturus, and the 
following saying, one I read today, comes from him: To 
win true freedom you must be a slave to philosophy.’ A 
person who siurrenders and subjects himself to her doesnt 
have his application deferred from day to day; he’s emanci- 
pated on the spot, the very service of philosophy being free- 
dom.. 

Quite possibly you’ll be demanding to know why 
quoting so many fine sayings from Epicurus father than ones 
belonging to our own school. But why should you think of 
them as belonging to Epicurus and not as common property? 
Think how many poets say things that philosophers have 
said — or ought to have said ! Not to mention the tragedians 
or our native Roman drama (which has a serious element in 
it as well and stands halfway between comedy and tragedy), 
think of the quantity of brilliant lines to be found lying about 
in farces alone! Think of the number of Publilius’ verses that 


46 



DC, 2 


LETTER IX 


really ouglit to Be spoken by actors wearing the tragic buskins 
instead of barefooted pantomime actors! I’ll quote one 
verse of his which belongs to philosophy, and the same facet 
of philosophy that I was occupied with just now, a verse in 
which he proclaims that gifts which chance brings our way 
are not to be regarded as possessions : 

If you pray a thing may 
And it does come your way, 

’Tis a long way from being your owii. 

I recall your expressing the same idea a good deal more 
happily and succinctly : 

What fortune has made yours is not your own. 

Audi can’t pass over that even happier expression of yours: 

The boon that could be given can be withdrawn. 

(This being from your own stock. I’m not debiting it to 
your account 1) 


LETTER IX 

You desire to know whether Epicurus is right in one of 
his letters in criticizing those who maintain that the wise 
man is content with himself and therefore needs no friend. 
This is what Epicurus objects to in Stdbo and those* who 
believe that the supreme ideal in Hfe is a mind devoid of 
feeling or as we say impatiens. We are bound to involve our- 
selves in ambiguity if we try to express in a single word the 
meaning of the Greek term apatheia by transferring it straight 
mto our word impatientia. For it may be understood in the 

* Philosophers of the Cynic school. 

47 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC K,2 

opposite sense to the one we wish, with people taking it to 
signify the man who is unable to endure anything that goes 
badly for him instead of what we mean by it, the man who 
refuses to allow anything that goes badly for him to affect 
him. Consider then whether it might not be preferable to 
call it a mind that is ‘invulnerable’ or ‘above all suffering • 

The difference here between the Epicurean and our own 
school is this: our wise man feels his troubles but overcomes 
them, while their wise man docs not even feel them. We 
share with them the belief that the -wise man is content with 
himself. Nevertheless, self-sufficient though he is, he still 
desires a friend, a neighbour, a companion. Notice how self- 
contented he is: on occasion such a man is content with a 
mere partial self- if he loses a hand as a result of war or disease, 
or has one of his eyes, or even both, put out in an accident, 
he will be satisfied with what remains of himself and be no 
less pleased with his body now that it is maimed and incom- 
plete than he was when it was whole. But while he does not 
hanker after what he has lost, he does prefer riot to lose them. 
And this is what we mean when we say the wise man is self- 
content; he is so in the sense that he is able to do without 
friends, not that he desires to do without them. When I 
speak of his being ‘able’ to do this, what I am saying m 
fact amounts to this: he bears the loss of a friend with equa- 
nimity. 

Not that he will then be without a friend, for it is his to 
decide how soon he makes good the loss. Just as Phidias can 
carve another statue straight away if he loses one, so our wne 
man "with his skill in the art of making friends will fdl ® 
place of someone he has lost. T suppose you will want to 
know how he will be able to make a friend so quickly. W^j^ > 

I shall tell you (provided we agree that I may make this e 
moment to pay my debt and square my account so ar as 
this letter is concerned). ‘I shall show you, said Hecato, ^ 

48 



LETTER IX 


IX, 9 

love philtre compounded without drug or herh or witch’s 
spell. It is this : if you wish to be loved, love.’ 

Great pleasure is to be found not only in keeping up an' 
old and established friendship but also in beginning and build- 
ing up a new. one. There is the same difference between having 
gained a friend and actually gaining a friend as there is between 
a farmer harvesting and a farmer sowing. The philosopher 
Attains used to say that it was more of a pleasure to make a 
friend than to have one, ‘in the same way as an artist derives 
more pleasure from painting than from having completed a 
picture’. When his whole attention is absorbed in concentra- 
tion on the work he is engaged on, a tremendous sense of 
. satisfaction is created in him by his very absorption. There is 
never quite the same gratification after he has lifted his hand 
from the finished work. From then on what he is enjoying is 
the art’s end product, whereas it was the art itself that he 
enjoyed while he was actually painting. So with our children, 
their growing up brings wider fruits but their infancy was . 
sweeter. 

To come back to the question, the wise man, self-sufficient 
as he is, still desires to have a friend if only for the purpose of 
practising friendship and ensuring that those talents are not 
idle. Not, as Epicurus put it in the same letter, ‘for the purpose 
of having someone to come and sit beside his bed when he is 
fil or come to his rescue when he is hard up or thrown into 
chains’, but so that on the contrary he may have someone by 
whose sickbed he himself may sit or whom he may himself 
release when that person is held prisoner by hostile hands. 
Anyone thinking of his own interests and seddng out friend- 
ship with this in view is making a great mistake. Things will 
end as they began; he has secured a friend who is going to 
come to his aid if captivity threatens: at the first clank of a 
chain that friend will disappear. These are what are commonly 
called fair-weather finendships. A person adopted as a friend 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC K,9 

for the sake of bis usefulness will be cultivated only for so 
long as he is useful. This explains the crowd of fnends that 
clusters about successful men and the lonely atmosphere 
about the ruined - their friends numing away when it comes 
to the testing point; it explains the countless scandalous 
instances of people deserting or betraying others out of fear 
for themselves. Tlie ending inevitably matches the beginning: 
a person who starts being friends with you because it pays him 
will similarly cease to be friends because it pays him to do so. 
If there is anything in a particular friendship that attracts a 
man other tlian the friendship itself, the attraction of some 
reward or other will counterbalance that of the friendship. 
What is my object in making a friend? To have someone to 
be able to die for, someone I may follow into exile, someone 
for whose life I may put myself up as security and pay the 
price as well. The thing you describe is not friendship but a 
business deal, looking to the likely consequences, with 
advantage as its goal. There can be no doubt that the desire 
lovers have for each other is not so very different from 
friendship - you might say it was friendship gone mad. 
Well, then, does anyone ever fall in love with a view to a 
profit, or advancement, or celebrity? Actual love in itself, 
heedless of all other considerations, inHames people s hearts 
with a passion for the beautiful object, not without the hope, 
too, that the affection will be mutual How then can the 
nobler stimulus of friendship be associated with any ignoble 
desire? 

You may say we are not at present concerned with the 
question whether friendship is something to be cultivated for 
its own sake. But this, on the contrary, is exactly what needs 
proving most; for if friendship is something to be sought 
out for its own sake, the self-contented man is entitled to 
pursue it. And how does he approach it? In the same way as 
he would any object of great beauty, not drawn by gain, not 

50 



LETTER IX 


rx, i6 

out of alarm at the vicissitudes of fortune. To procure 
friendship only for better and not for worse is to rob it of all 
its dignity. 

‘The wise man is content with himself.’ A lot of people, 
Lucihus, put quite the wrong interpretation on this statement. 
They remove the wise man from all- contact with the world 
outside, shutting him up inside his own skin. We must be 
quite clear about the meaning of this sentence and just how 
much it claims to say. It applies to him so far as happiness in 
life is concerned; for this all he needs is a rational and elevated 
spirit that treats fortune with disdain; for the actual business 
of hving he needs a great number of things. I should like to 
draw your attention to a similar distinction made by 
Chrysippus. The wise man, he said, lacked nothing but 
needed a great nmnber of things, whereas ‘the fool, on the 
other hand, needs nothing (for he does not know how to use 
anything) but lacks everything.’ The wise man needs hands 
and eyes and a great number of things that are required for 
the purposes of day-to-day life; but he lacks nothing,, for 
lacking something imphes tiiat it is a necessity and nothing, to 
the wise man, is a necessity. 

Self-contented as he is, then, he does need friends - and 
wants as many of them as possible — but not to enable him to 
lead a happy hfe ; this he will have even without friends. The 
supreme ideal does not call for any external aids. It is home- 
grown, wholly self-developed. Once it starts looking outside 
itself for any part of itself it is on the way to being dominated 
by fortvme. 

‘But what sort of life,’ people may say, ‘wiU the wise man 
have if . he is going to be left without any friends when he is 
thrown into prison or stranded among foreigners or detained 
in the course of a voyage in distant parts or cast away , on 
some desert shore?’ It will, be like that of Jove while nature 
takes her rest, of brief duration, when the universe is dissolved 


51 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC K,l6 

and the gods arc all merged in one, finding repose in himself, 
absorbed in his own thoughts. Such is more or less the way of 
the wise man: he retires to his inner self, is his own company. 
So long in fact as he remains in a position to order his affairs 
according to his own judgement, he remains self-content 
even when he marries, even when he brings up his children. 
He is self-content and yet he would refuse to live if he had to 
Hve without any human company at all. Natural promptings 
(not thoughts of any advantage to himself) impel him to- 
wards friendship. We are bom with a sense of the pleasanmess 
of firiendship just as of other things. In the same way as there 
exists in man a distaste for solitude and a craving for society, 
natural instinct drawdng one human being to another, so 
too with this there is something mherent in it that stimulates 
us into seeking firiendships. The wise man, never Ae ess, 
imequalled though he is in his devotion to his friends, oug 
regarding them as being no less important and frequent y 
more important than his own self, will still consider w at is 
valuable in life to be something wholly confined to his i^er 
self. He will repeat the words of Stilbo (the Sttlbo w om 
Epicurus’ letter attacks), when his home town was capw^e 
and he emerged firom the general conflagration, his c ^ 
lost, his wife lost, alone and none the less a happy naan, 
was questioned by Demetrius. Asked by this man, o > 
firom the destruction he dealt out to towns, as Demetrius 
City Sacker, whether he had lost anything, he rep le , 

. all my valuables with me.’ There was an active and courage^ 

man - victorious over the very victory of 
have lost,’ he said, ‘nothing.’ He made Demetrius wond ^ 
whether he had won a victory after all. All my . ’ 

he said, ‘are with me’, meaning by this the qu^tj« of a jus^ 
a good and an enlightened character, and mdeed the very 
of not regarding as valuable anything that is capable 
taken away. We are impressed at the way some 

52 



DC, 22 


LETTER IX 


pass right through fire without physical harm: how much 
more impressive is the .way this man came through the 
burning and the bloodshed and the ruins uninjured and un- 
scathed. Does it make you see how much easier it can be to 
conquer a whole people than to conquer a single man? 
Those words of Stilbo’s are equally those of the Stoic. He 
too carries his valuables intact through cities burnt to ashes, 
for he is contented with himself. This is the line he draws as 
the boundary for his happiness. 

In case you imagine that we Stoics are the only people who 
produce noble sayings, let me tell you something - see that 
you put this down to my credit, even though I have aheady 
settled my account with you for today - Epicurus himself, 
who has nothing good to say for Stilbo, has uttered a state- 
ment quite like diis one of Stilbo’s. ‘Any man,’ he says, ‘who 
does not think that what he has is more than ample, is an 
unhappy man, even if he is the master of the whole world.’ 
Or if you prefer to see it expressed like this (the point being 
that we should be ruled not by die actual words used but by the 
sense of them), ‘a man is unhappy, though he reign the world 
over, if he does not consider himself supremely happy.’ To 
show you, indeed, that these are sentiments of a universal 
character, prompted, evidently, by natinre herself, you will 
find the following verse in a comic poet : 

Not happy he who thinks himself not so.* 

What difference does it make, after all, what your position in 
life is if you dislike it yourself? 

What about so-and-so,’ you may ask, ‘who became rich 
in such a despicable manner, or such-and-such a person who 
gives orders to a great many people but is at the mercy of a 
great many more? Supposing they say they are happy, will 
their own opinions to this effect make them happy?’ It does 
* The authorship is not known. 


53 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC JX,22 

not make any difference -what a man says; wliat matters is 
how he feels, and not how he feels on one particular day but 
how he feels at all times. But you have no need to fear that so 
valuable a thing may fall into unworthy hands. Only the 
wise man is content with what is his. All foolishness suffers 
the burden of dissatisfaction with itself. 


LETTER XI - 

I HAVE had a conversation with your talented friend. From 
the very beginning of his talk with me it was apparent what 
considerable gifts of character and intelligence he possesses. 
He gave me a foretaste of his capabilities, to which he will 
certainly live up, for the things he said, caught as he was 
quite off his guard, were entirely unrehearsed. As he w^ 
recovering his self-possession, he could scarcely get over his 
embarrassment - always a good sign in a young man - so 
deep had the blush been that suffused his face. This I rath^ 
suspect will remain with him even when he has built up his 
character and stripped it of all weakness - even when he has 
become a wise man. For no amount of wisdom enables one 
to do away with physical or mental weaknesses that arise 
from natural causes; anything inborn or ingrained in one^ 
by dint of practice be allayed, but not overcome. When they 
free a crowd of people some men, even ones with the stoutest 
of hearts, break into the sort of sweat one usually sees on 
persons in an overheated and exhausted state; some 
experience a trembling at the knees when they are about to 
speak; some a chattering of the teeth, a stuttering tongue or 
stammering lips. These are things which neither traim^ 
nor experience ever eliminates. Nature just wields her power 
and uses the particular weakness to make even the strongest 

54 



LETTER XI 


XI, 7 

conscious of her. One of these things I well know is a blush, 
which has a habit of suddenly reddening the faces of men of 
even the most dignified demeanour. It is of course more 
noticeable in the young, with their hotter blood and sensitive 
complexions; nevertheless seasoned men and ageing men alike 
are affected by it. Some men are more to be feared on the 
occasions when they flush than at any other time - as if in so 
dok^ they let loose all their inhibitions; SuUa was at his 
wildest when the blood had rushed to his visage. No features 
were more susceptible than Pompey’s: he never failed to 
blush in company, and particularly at public meetings. I 
remember Fabianus blushing when he appeared to give 
evidence before the Senate, and this bashfulness looked 
wonderfully well on him. "When this happens it is not due to 
some mental infir mity, but to the unfamiharity of some situa- 
• tion or other, which may not necessarily strike any alarm into 
inexperienced people but does produce a reaction in them if 
they are thus liable through having a natural, physical pre- 
disposition to it; certain people have good, ordinary blood 
and others just have an animated, lively sort of blood that 
comes to the face quickly. 

No amount of wisdom, as I said before, ever banishes 
these things; otherwise - if she' eradicated every weakness - 
wisdom would have dominion over the world of nature. 
One’s physical make-up and the attributes that were one’s 
lot at birth remain settled no matter how much or how long 
the personahty may strive after perfect adjustment. One 
cannot ban these things any more than one can call them up. 
The tokens used to portray embarrassment by professional 
actors, those actors who portray emotion, simulate unhappiness 
and reproduce for us fear and apprehension, are a hanging 
of the head, a dropping of the voice, a casting down of the 
eyes and keeping them fixed on the ground; a blush is some- 
thing they can never manage to reproduce; it is something that 


55 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC xr,7 

■will neither be summoned up nor be told to stay away. Against 
these things philosophy holds out no remedy and avails one 
nothing; they are quite independent; they come unbidden, they 
go unbidden. 

My letter calls for a conclusion. Here’s one for you, one 
that will serve you in good stead, too, which I’d like you to 
take to heart. “We need to set our affections- on some good 
man and keep him constantly before our eyes, so that we may 
live as if he were watching us and do everything as if he saw 
what we were doing.’ This, my dear Lucilius, is Epicurus 
advice, and in giving it he has given us a guardian and a moral 
tutor - and not widiout reason, either: misdeeds are greatly 
diminished if a wimess is always standing near intending 
doers. The personality should be provided with someone it 
can revere, someone whose influence can make even its 
private, inner life more pure. Happy the man who improves 
other people not merely when he is in their presence but even 
when he is in their thoughts ! And happy, too, is the person 
who can so revere another as to adjust and shape his o-wn 
personality in the light of recollections, even, of that other. A 
person able to revere another thus -will soon deserve, to be 
revered himself. So choose yourself a Cato - or, if Cato seems 
too severe for you, a Laelius, a man whose chairacter is not 
quite so strict. Choose someone whose way of life as well as 
words, and whose very face as mirroring the character that nes 
behind it, have won your approval. Be always pointing him 
out to yourself either as your guardian or as your mode . 
There is a need, in my view, for someone as a standard against 
which our characters can measure themselves. Without a 
ruler to do it against you won’t make the crooked straight. 


S6 



xn,4 


LETTER XII 

Wherever I turn I see firesli evidence of my old age. I 
visited my place just out of Rome recently and was grvunbling 
about the expense of maintaining the building, which was in a 
dilapidated state. My manager told me the trouble wasn’t 
due to any neglect on his part: he was doing his utmost but 
the house was old. That house had taken shape under my 
own hands; what’s to become of me if stones of my own age 
are crumbling like that? Losing my temper I seized at the 
first excuse that presented itself for venting my irritation on 
him. ‘It’s quite clear,’ I said, ‘that these plane trees are being 
neglected. There’s no foliage on them. Look at those knotty, 
dried-up branches and those wretched, flaking tnmks. That 
wouldn’t happen if someone dug round them and watered 
them.’ He swore by my guardian angel he was doing his 
utmost: in everything his care was unremitting but the poor 
things were just old. Between you and me, now, I had planted 
them myself and seen the first leaf appearing on them myself. 
Then, turning towards the firont door, I said: ‘Who’s that? 
Who’s that decrepit old person? The door’s the proper 
place for him aU right — he looks as if he’s on the way out. 
Where did you get him from? What was the attraction in 
taking over someone else’s dead for burial?’ Whereupon the 
man said, ‘Don’t you recognize me? I’m Felicio. You used 
to bring me toy figures.* I’m the son of the manager PHIositus, 
your pet playmate.’ ‘The man’s absolutely crazy,’ I said. 

Become a little child again, has he, actually calls himself my 
playmate? Well, die way he’s losing his teeth at diis very 
moment, it’s perfectly possible.’ 

So I owe it to this place of mine near toivn that my old 

* Prcsaits which were customary during the Saturnalia holidays. 


57 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC xa ,4 

age was made clear to me at every turn. Well, we should 
cherish old age and eryoy it. It is full of pleasure if you know 
how to use it. Fruit tastes most delicious just when its season 
is ending. The charms of youth are at their greatest at the 
time of its passing. It is the final glass which pleases the 
inveterate drinker, the one that sets the crowning touch on 
his intoxication and sends him off into oblivion. Every pleasure 
defers till its last its greatest delights. The time of life which 
offers the greatest delight is the age that sees the downward 
movement — not the steep decline — already begun; and in my 
opinion even the age that stands on the brink has pleasures 
of its own — or else the very fact of not experiencing the want 
of any pleasures takes their place. How nice it is to have out- 
worn one’s desires and left them behind ! 

, It s not very pleasant, though,* you ma y say, ‘to have 
death right before one’s eyes.’ To this I would say, firstly, 
that death ought to be right there before the eyes of a young 
man just as much as an old one — the order in which we each 
receive our summons is not determined by our precedence 
in the register — and, secondly, that no one is so very old that 
it would be quite unnatural for him to hope for one more 
day. . . * 

Every day, therefore, should be regulated as if it were the 
one that brings up the rear, the one that rounds out and com- 
pletes our lives. Pacuvius, the man who acquired a right to 
Syria by prescription,^^ was in the habit of conducting a 
memorial ceremony for himself with wine and funeral 
feasting of the kind we are familiar with, and then being carried 
on a bier from the dmner table to his bed, while a chanting 
to music went on of the words ‘He has lived, he has lived’ in 
Greek,- amid the applause of the young libertines present. 
Never a day passed but he celebrated his own funeral. What 

* A short, obscure digression (§§6 to 7) concerning divisions of time 
is omitted. 


58 



xn, II 


LETTEH XII 


he did from discxeditable motives we should do from honour- 
able ones, saying in all joyfidness and cheerfulness as we 
retire to our beds, 

I have lived; I have completed now the course 
That fortune long ago allotted me.* 

If God adds the morrow we should accept it joyfully. The 
man who looks for the morrow without worrying over it 
knows a peaceful independence and a happiness beyond aU 
others. "Whoever has said T have lived’ receives a windfall 
every day he gets up in the morning. 

But I must close this letter now. ‘What!’ you’ll be saying. 
‘Is it coming to me just as it is, without any parting contribu- 
tion?-’ Don’t worry, it’s bringing you something. Why did I 
call it ‘something’, though? It’s a great deal. For what could 
be more splendid than the following saying which I’m 
entrusting to this letter of mine for delivery to you: ‘To Hve 
under constraint is a misfortrme, but there is no constraint to 
live under constraint.’ Of course not, when on every side 
there are plenty of short and easy roads to freedom there for 
the taking. Let' us thank God that no one can be held'^a 
prisoner in life - the very constraints can be trampled under 
foot. 

‘It was Epicurus who said that,’ you protest. ‘What business 
have you got with someone else’s property?’ Whatever is 
true is my property. And I shall persist in inflicting Epicurus 
on you, in order to bring it home to the people who take an 
oath of allegiance to someone and never afterwards consider 
what is being said but only who said it, that the things of 
greatest merit are common property. 

* Virgil, Aeneid, IV 1653. 


59 



LETTER XV 


Our ancestors had a custom, observed right down as far as 
my own lifetime, of adding to the opening words of a 
letter: T trust this finds you as it leaves me, in good health. 
We have good reason to say; trust this finds you in pursuit 
of wisdom.’ For this is precisely what is meant by good health. 
Without wisdom the mind is sick, and the body itself, hov/- 
ever physically powerful, can only have the kind of strength 
that is found in persons in a demented or delirious state. So 
this is the sort of healthiness you must make your principal 
concern. You must attend to the other sort as well, but see 
that it takes second place. It won’t cost you any great trouble 
if good health is all you want. For it is silly, my dear Lucilius, 
and no way for an educated man to behave, to spend one s 
time exercising the biceps, broadening the neck and shoulders 
and developing the lungs. Even when the extra feeding has 
produced gratifying results and you’ve put on a lot of muscle, 
you’ll never match the strength or the weight of a prize ox. 
The greater load, moreover, on the body is crushing to the 
spirit and renders it less active. So keep the body with^ 
bounds as much as you can and make room for the spirit. 
Devotees of physical culture have to put up with a lot or 
nuisances. There are the exercises, in the first place, the toil 
involved in which drains the vitality and renders it unfit for 
concentration or the more demanding sort of studies. Next 
there is the heavy feeding, which dulls mental acuteness. 
Then there is the taking on as coaches of the worst brand o 
slave, persons who divide their time between putting on 
lotion and putting down liquor,' whose idea of a well spent 
day consists of getting up a good sweat and then rephcmg 
the fluid lost v/ith plenty of drink, all the better to be absorbe 

6o 



LETTER XV 


XV. 7 

on a dry stomach. Drinking and perspiring - it’s the life of a 
dyspeptic! There are short and simple exercises which will 
tire the body without undue delay and save what needs 
especially close accounting for, time. There is running, 
swinging weights about and jumping - either high-jumping 
or long-jumping or the kind indulged in by the priests of 
Mars, if one may so describe it, or to be rather more dis- 
respectful, by the laundress. Pick out any of these for ease and 
straightforwardness. But whatever you do, return from 
body to mind very soon. Exercise it day and night. Only a 
moderate amount of work is needed for it to thrive and 
develop. It is a form of exercise to which cold and heat and 
- even old age are no obstacle. Cultivate an asset which the 
passing of time itself improves. 

I’m not telling you to be always bent over book or writing- 
tablets. The mind has to be given some time off, but in such a 
way that it may be refreshed, not relaxed till it goes to pieces. 
Travelling in one’s carriage shakes the body up and doesn’t 
interfere with intellecmal pursuits; you can read, dictate, 
speak, or listen - nor does walking, for that matter, preclude 
any of these activities. Nor need you look down on voice- 
training, though I will not have you practising any of this 
ascending and then descending again by degrees through set 
scales - if you start that, you’ll be going on to take lessons in 
Walking 1 Once let into your house the sort of person that 
hunger teaches unheard-of occupations and you’ll have some- 
one regulating the way you walk and watching the way you 
use your jaws as you eat, and in fact going just as far as your 
patience and credulity lead his audacity on. Are you to 
conclude from what I’ve just said that your voice should 
start its exercises with immediate shouting at full force? The 
natural thing is to lead up to it through easy stages, so natural 
in fact that even persons involved in a quarrel begin in con- 
versational tones: only later do they go on to rend the air. No 

6i 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XV, 7 

one makes an. impassioned appeal for *the help and support of 
all true men of Rome* at the very outset. . . .* Our purpose 
in all this is not to give the voice exercise, but to make it 
give us exercise. 

I have relieved you, then, of no little bother. To these 
favours there shall be added the following small contribution, 
a striking maxim that comes from Greece. Here it is: ‘The 
life of folly is empty of gratitude, full of anxiety: it is focused 
wholly on the future.’ ‘Who said that?’ you ask. The same 
man as before. And what sort of life do you think is meant by 
‘the life of foUy ’? Baba’s and Isio’s?f No, he means our own 
hfe, precipitated by blind desire into activities that are likely 
to bring us harm and will certainly never bring us satisfaction - 
if they could ever satisfy us they would have done so by now - 
never thinking how pleasant it is to ask for nothing, how 
splendid it is to be complete and be independent of fortune. So 
continually remind yourself, Ludlius, of the many things you 
have achieved. When you look at all the people out in front 
of you, think of all the ones behind you. If you want to feel 
appreciative where the gods and your life are concerned, just 
think how many people you’ve outdone. Why be concerned 
about others, come to that, when you’ve outdone your own 
self? Set yourself a limit which you couldn’t even exceed if 
you wanted to, and say good-bye at last to those deceptive 
prizes more precious to those who hope for them than to 
those who have won them. If there were anything substantial 
in them they would sooner or later bring a sense of fullness, 
as it is they simply aggravate the thirst of those who sw^ow 
them. Away with pomp and show; as for the uncertain lot 
that the future has in store for me, why should I demand from 

* The next sentence (dealing further with the correct manner of 
declamation) is omitted, the text being hopelessly corrupt, 
f Baba, and one may presume also Isio, was a celebrated too or 

clown. 


6z 



XVI, 3 


LETTER XVI 


fortune that she should give me this and that rather than 
demand firom myself that I should not ask for them? Why 
should I ask for them, after all? Am I to pile them up in total 
forgetfulness of the frailty of human existence? What is the 
purpose of my labours going to be? See, this day’s my last - 
or maybe it isn’t, but it’s not so far away from it. 


LETTER XVI 

It is clear to you, I know, Lucihus, that no one can lead a 
happy life, or even one that is bearable, without the pursuit 
of wisdom, and that the perfection of wisdom is what makes 
the happy life, although even the beginnings of wisdom make 
life bearable. Yet this conviction, clear as it is, needs to be 
strengthened and given deeper roots through daily reflection; 
making noble resolutions is not as important as keeping the 
resolutions you have made already. You have to persevere 
and fortify your pertinacity xmtil the will to good becomes a 
disposition to good. So you needn’t go in for all this long- 
winded protestation or say any more on the subject - I’m 
.well aware that you’ve made a great deal of progress. I 
reahze the feelings that prompt you to put these things in 
your letter, and there is no pretence or speciousness about 
them. But - to give you my honest opinion - at this stage, 
although I have great hopes , of you, I do not yet feel quite 
confident about you. And I should like. you to adopt the 
same attitude: you’ve no grovmds for forming a ready, hasty 
belief in yourself. Carry out a searching analysis and close 
scrutiny of yourself in all sorts of different Hghts. Consider 
above all else whether you’ve advanced in philosophy or just 
m actual years. 

Philosophy is. not an occupation of a popular nature, nor 

63 



XETTERS FROM A STOIC 


XVI, 3 


is it pursued for the sake of self-advertisement. Its concern is 
not with words, but with facts. It is not carried on with tBe 
object of passing the day in an entertaining sort of way and 
taking the boredom out of leismre. It moulds and builds the 
personahty, orders one’s life, regulates one’s conduct, shows 
one what one should do and what one should leave undone, 
sits at the helm and keeps one on the correct course as one is 
tossed about in perilous seas. Without it no one can lead a 
life free of fear or worry. Every hour of the day countless 
situations arise that call for advice, and for that advice we 
have to look to philosophy. 

Someone may say: ‘What help can philosophy be to me if 
there is such a thing as fate? What help can philosophy be if 
there is a deity controlling all? What help can it be if all is 
governed by chance? For it is impossible either to change 
what is already determined or to make preparations to meet 
what is imdetermined; either, in the first case, my planning 
is forestalled by a God who decrees how I am to act, or, m 
the second case, it is fortune that allows me no freedom to 
plan.’ Whichever of these alternatives, Lucilius, is true - even 
if all of them are true - we still need to practise philosophy. 
Whether we are caught in the grasp of an inexorable law o 
fate, whether it is God who as lord of the umverse has ordere 
all things, or whether the affairs of mankmd are tossed an 
buffeted haphazardly by chance, it is .philosophy that has t e 
duty of protecting us. She will encourage us to submit to 
God with cheerfulness and to fortune with defiance; she 
show you how to follow God and bear what chance may sen 
you. But I mustn’t pass on here to a discussion of the prob em 
what is within our control if there is a governing proviff 
whether we are carried along enmeshed in a train of fate 
happenings, or whether we are at .the mercy of the sudden an 
the unforeseeable. For the present I go back to the pom 
where I was before, to advise and urge you not to allow yonr 

64 



LETTER XVI 


XVI, 9 

Spiritual enthusiasm to cool off or fall away. Keep a hold on it 
and put it on a firm footing, so that what is at present an 
enthusiasm may become a settled spiritual disposition. 

If I know you, you’ll have been looking around from the 
very start of this letter to see what it’s going to bring you by 
way of a little present. Search the letter and you’ll find it. You 
needn’t think my kindness all that remarkable: I am only being 
generous, still, with someone else’s property. Why, though, do 
I call it someone else’s? Whatever is well said by anyone 
belongs to me. Here is another saying of Epicurus: ‘If you 
shape your life according to nature, you will never be poor; 
if according to people’s opinions, you will never be rich.’ 
Nature’s wants are small, while those of opinion are Hmitless. 
Imagine that you’ve piled up aU that a veritable host of rich 
men ever possessed, that fortune has carried you far beyond 
the bounds of wealth so far as any private individual is 
concerned, building you a roof of gold and clothing you in 
royal purple, conducting you to such a height of opulence 
and luxury that you hide die earth with marble floors - put- 
ting you in a position not merely to own, but to walk all over 
treasures - throw in sculptures, paintings, all that has been 
produced at tremendous pains by all the arts to satisfy ex- 
travagance: all these things will only induce in you a craving 
for even bigger things. Natural desires are limited; those 
which spring from false opinions have nowhere to stop, for 
falsity has no point of termination. When a person is following 
a track, there is an eventual end to it somewhere, but with 
Wandering at large there is no limit. So give up pointless, 
empty journeys, and whenever you want to know whether 
the desire aroused in you by something you are pursuing is 
natural or quite unseeing, ask yourself whether it is capable 
of coining to rest at any point; if after going a long way 
^ere is always something remaining farther away, be sure it 
IS not something natural. 


65 



LETTEES FEOM A STOIC XVlii,7 

penny, and will come , to see that security from care is not 
dependent on fortune - for even when she is angry she will 
always let us have what is enough for our needs. 

There is no reason, mind you, why you should suppose 
yourself to be performing a considerable feat in doing this - 
you will only be doing something done by thousands upon 
tliousands of slaves and paupers. But take credit on one 
account, that you will be doing it of your own free choice - 
and finding it no more difficult to endure on a permanent 
basis than to try out once in a while. We should be practising 
with a dummy target, getting to be at home with poverty so 
that fortune cannot catch us unprepared. We be easier 
in our minds when rich if we have come to reahze how far 
from burdensome it is to be poor. The great hedonist teacher 
Bpicurus used to observe certain periods during which he 
would be niggardly in satisfying his hunger, wdth the object 
of seeing to what extent, if at all, one hereby fell short of 
attaining full and complete pleasure, and whether it was worth 
going to much trouble to make the deficit good. At least so 
he says in the letter he wrote to Polyaenus in the ye^r Charinus 
was in office. He boasts in it indeed that he is managing to 
feed himself for less than a halfyenny whereas Metrodorus, 
not yet having made such good progress, needs a whole half- 
penny ! Do you think such fare can do no more than fill ^ 
person up ? It can fill him wnth pleasure as well, and not the 
bind of insubstantial, fleeting pleasure that needs constant 
renewal but a pleasure which is • sure and lasting. Barley 
porridge, or a crust of barley bread, and water do not make a 
very cheerful diet, but nothing gives one keener pleasure than 
the abihty to derive pleasure even from that - and the feeling 
of having arrived at something which one cannot be deprived 
^f by any imjust stroke of fortime. Prison rations are more 
generous: the man in the condemned cell is not so scantily 
fgd as that by the executioner; to reduce oneself then, of 

- 68 



LETTEl^ XVIII 


xvni, 15 

one’s ovTi free dioicc to a diet that no man has any real call 
to be apprehensive about even if he is sentenced to deatli, 
that is an act of real spiritual greatness. To do this is truly to 
forestall the blows of fortune. So, my dear Lucilius, start 
following tlicsc men’s practice and appoint certain days on 
which to give up every tiling and make yourself at home wnth 
next to nothing. Start cultivating a relationship with poverty. 

Dc.ir guest, be bold enough to pay no heed 
To riches, and so make yourself, like him, 

Worthy of a god.* 


For no one is worthy of a god unless he has paid no heed to 
riches. I am not, mind you, against your possessing tliem, but 
I want to ensure that you possess tlicm witliout tremors; and 
this you will only achieve in one way, by convincing your- 
self that you can live a happy life even witliout them, and by 
always regarding diem as being on the point of vanishing. 

But it’s time 1 started folding up this letter. ‘Not till you’ve 
settled your account,’ you say. Well, I’ll refer you to Epicurus 
for payment. ‘Anger carried to excess begets madness.’ How 
true this is you’re boimd to know, having had both slaves and 
enemies. It is a passion, though, which flares up against all 
types of people. It is bom of love as well as hate, and is as 
liable to arise in the course of sport or jesting as in affairs of a 
serious kind. The factor that counts is not the importance of the 
cause from which it springs but the kind of personality it 
lands in, in the same way as with fire what matters is not the 
fierceness of the flame but where it catches - solid objects 
may resist the fiercest flame while, conversely, dry and in- 
flammable matter will nurse a mere spark into a conflagra- 
tion. It is true, my dear Lucilius. The outcome of violent 
anger is a mental raving, and therefore anger is to be avoided 
not for the sake of moderation but for the sake of sanity. 


i~s.-4 


* Virgil, Aeneid, VUI: 364-5. 
69 



xvm,! 


LETTER XVIII 


It is the month of December, and yet the whole city is in a 
sweat ! Festivity at state expense is given unrestricted licence. 
Everywhere there echoes the noise of preparations on a 
massive scale. It all suggests that the Saturnalia* holidays are 
different from the ordinary working day, when the difference 
is really non-existent - so much so in fact that the man wBo 
said that December used to be a month but is now a year 
was, in my opinion, not far wide of the mark I 
If I had you with me I should enjoy consulting you and 
finding out what course you think we should follow: should 
we make no alteration in our daily habits, or should we take 
off our togas - time was when a change from formal wear 
would come about only during periods of grave politic^ 
upheaval, whereas with us it happens for holidays and 
pleasure’s sake! - and have dinner parties with a note or 
gaiety about them, to avoid giving the impression that we di^ 
agree with the ways of those around us? If I know you as weu 
as I think I do and you had to give a decision ha the matter, 
you would say that we should be neither altogether like nor 
altogether unlike the festive-hatted crowd. But perhaps 
is the very season when we should be keeping the soul under 
strict control, making it unique in abstaining from pleasure 
just when the crowd are all on pleasure bent. If the soul suc- 
ceeds in avoiding either heading or being carried away in t e 
direction of the temptations that lead people into extravag^*^ 
hving, no surer proof of its strength of purpose can o 
vouciwafed it. Remaining dry and sober takes a good d 
more strength of will, when everyone about one is puking 
drunk; it takes a more developed sense of fitness, on the ot cr 
* A festival lasting several days, commencing on the 17th December. 

66 



LETTER XVIII 


xvm, 7 

hand, not to make of oneself a person apart, to be neither 
indistinguishable from those about one nor conspicuous by 
one’s difference, to do the same things but not in quite the 
same manner. For a hoHday can be celebrated ^without 
ejctravagant festivity. 

Still, my determination to put your moral strength of 
purpose to the test is such that I propose to give even you the 
following direction found in great men’s teaching; set 
aside now and then a number of days during which you will 
be content with the plainest of food, and very little of it, 
and with rough, coarse clothing, and will ask yourself. Is 
tins what one used to dread?’ It is in tunes of security that the 
spirit should be preparing itself to deal with difficult times; 
while fortune is bestowing favours on it then is the tune for it 
to be strengthened against her rebuffs. In the midst of peace 
the soldier carries out manoeuvres, throws up earthworks 
against a non-existent enemy and tires himself out with tm- 
necessary toil in order to be equal to it when it is necessary. 
If you want a man to keep his head when the crisis comes you 
must give him some training before it comes. This was the 
mn of the men* who once every month pretended they were 
poor, bringing themselves face to face with want, to prevent 
their ever being terrified by a situation which they had 
hequently rehearsed. 

You must not at this point imagine that I mean meals 
like Timon’s or *the poor man’s room’ or anything else to 
"which the extravagance of wealth resorts to amuse away its 
tedium. That pallet must be a real one, and the same appHes 
to your smock, and your bread, must be hard and grimy. 
Endure all this for three or fovu: days at a tune, sometimes more, 
so that it is a genuine trial and not an amusement. At the end 
of it, believe me, Luciliiis, you will revel in being sated for a 

* Epicureans. As the next sentence indicates, rich men sometimes had 
a room fitted out for the purpose. 


67 



penny, and will come to see that security from care is not 
dependent on fortune - for even when she is angry she will 
always let us have what is enough for our needs. 

There is no reason, mind you, why you should suppose 
yourself to be performing a considerable feat in doing this - 
you will only be doing something done by thousands upon 
thousands of slaves and paupers. But take credit on one 
account, that you will be doing it of your own free choice - 
and finding it no more difficult to endure on a permanent 
basis than to try out once in a while. We should be practising 
with a dummy target, getting to be at home with poverty so 
that fortune cannot catch us unprepared. We shall be easier 
in our minds when rich if we have come to realize how & 
from burdensome it is to be poor. The great hedonist teacher 
Epicurus used to observe certain periods during which he 
would be niggardly in satisfying his hunger, with the object 
of seeing to what extent, if at all, one thereby fell short of 
attaining full and complete pleasure, and whether it was worth 
going to much trouble to make the deficit good. At least so 
he says in the letter he wrote to Polyaenus in the year Charinus 
was in office. He boasts in it indeed that he is managing to 
feed himself for less than a halfpenny whereas Metrodorus, 
not yet having made such good progress, needs a whole half- 
penny! Do you think such fare can do no more than fill ^ 
person up? It can fill him with pleasure as well, and not the 
kind of insubstantial, fleeting pleasure that needs constant 
renewal but a pleasure which is sure and lasting. Barley 
porridge, or a crust of barley bread, and water do not m^e a 
very cheerful diet, but nothing gives one keener pleasure tlwn 
the ability to derive pleasure even from that - and the feeling 
of having arrived at something which one cannot be deprived 
of by any imjust stroke of fortune. Prison rations are more 
generous: the man in the condemned cell is not so scantily 
fed as that by the executioner; to reduce oneself, then, o 

. 68 


LETTER XVIII 


xvni, 15 

one’s own free choice to a diet that no man has any real call 
to be apprehensive about even if he is sentenced to death, 
that is an act of real spiritual greatness. To do this is truly to 
forestall the blows of fortune. So, my dear Ludlius, start 
following these men’s practice and appoint certain days on 
which to give up ever)'tlung and make yourself at home with 
next to nothing. Start cultivating a relationship with poverty. 

Dear guest, be bold enough to pay no heed 
To riches, and so make yourself, like him, 

Worthy of a god.* 

For no one is worthy of a god unless he has paid no heed to 
riches. I am not, mind you, against your possessing them, but 
I want to ensure that you possess them without tremors; and 
this you win only achieve in one way, by convincing your- 
self that you can live a happy life even without them, and by 
always regarding them as being on the point of vanishing. 

But it’s time I started folding up this letter. ‘ Not till you’ve 
settled your account,’ you say. Well, I’ll refer you to Epicurus 
for payment. ‘Anger carried to, excess begets madness.’ How 
true this is you’re bound to know, having had both slaves and 
enenues. It is a passion, though, which flares up against aU 
types of people. It is bom of love as well as hate, and is as 
liable to arise in the course of sport or jesting as in affairs of a 
serious kind. The factor that counts is not the importance of the 
cause j&om which it springs but the kind of personality it 
lands in, in the same way as with fire what matters is not the 
fierceness of the flame but where it catches - soHd objects 
may resist the fiercest flame while, conversely, dry and in- 
flammable matter wfll nurse a mere spark into a conflagra- 
^on. It is tme, my dear Lucilius. The outcome of violent 
mger is a mental raving, and therefore anger is to be avoided 
not for the sake of moderation but for the sake of sanity. 

* Virgil, Aeneid, VIII : 3 64-5. 

69 


Us.— 4 



XXVI,I 


letter XXVT 

It s only a short time since I was telling you I was in sight of 
oid age. Now I’m afraid I may have left old age behind me 
a tc^e er. Some other term would be more in keeping now 
with my years, or at least my present physical state, since old 
age coimotes a period of decline, not debility. Put me in thi 
list of the decrepit, the ones on the very brink! However, j 
congratulate myself, mind you, on the fact that my age has 
not, so ar as I m aware, brought any deterioration in my 
spirit, conscious as I am of the deterioration in my constitution. 
Omy my vices and their accessories have decayed: the spirit 
IS full of life, and delighted to be having only limited dealings 
body. It has thrown off a great part of its burden, 
t s u I of vigour, and carrying on an argument with me on 
the subject of old age, maintaining that these are its finest 
® accept what it says, and let it make the most of 
its blessings. It tells me to start thinking and examine how far 
I owe tim serenity and sobriety to philosophy, and how far I 
owe it simply to my years, and to investigate with some care 
what things I really am refusing to do and what I’m simply 
incapable of doing — and it s prepared to accept whatever I’m ' 
really pleased to find myself incapable of doing as equivalent 
to refusing to do them; and what cause can there be for 
complaint, after all, in anything that was always bound to 
come to an end fading gradually away?. What is troubling 
about that? ‘Nothing,’ you may say, ‘could be more troubling 
than the idea of our wasting and perishing away — melting 
out of existence, one may aptly call it, since we aren’t struck 
down all of a sudden but worn away, every day that passes 
dimmishing in some degree our powers.’ Moving to one’s end 
through nature’s own gentle process of dissolution - is there 


70 


LETTER XXVI 


xx\nr, 8 - 

a better way of leaving life than diat? Not because there is 
anything wrong with a sudden, violent departure, but be- 
cause diis gradual withdrawal is an easy route. 

Anyway, here’s what I do: I imagine to myself that the 
testing time is drawing near, that die day that is going to see 
judgement pronounced on the whole of my past life has 
actually arrived, and I take a look at myself and address my- 
self in these terms: ‘All diat I’ve done or said up to now 
counts for nothing. My showing to date, besides being heavily 
varnished over, is of paltry value and reliability as a guarantee 
of my spirit. I’m going to leave it to death to settle what 
progress I’ve made. Without anxiety, then. I’m making 
ready for the day when the tricks and disguises will be put 
away and I shall come to a verdict on myself, determining 
whether the courageous attitudes I adopt are really felt or 
just so many words, and whether or not the defiant chal- 
lenges I’ve hurled at fortune have been mere pretence and 
pantomime. Away with the world’s opinion of you - it’s 
always unsettled and divided. Away witli the pursuits that 
have occupied the whole of your life - death is going to 
deliver the verdict in your case. Yes, all your debates and 
learned conferences, your scholarly talk and collection of 
maxims from the teachings of philosophers, are in no way 
indicative of genuine spiritual strength. Bold words come even 
from the timidest. It’s only when you’re breathing your last 
that, the way you’ve spent your time will become apparent. 

I accept the terms, and feel no dread of the coming judge- 
ment.’ That’s what I say to myself, but assume that I’ve said 
it to you as well. You’re younger than I am, but what difier- 
ence does that make? No count is taken of years. Just where 
death is expecting you is something we cannot know; so, 
for your part, expect him everywhere. 

I was just intending to stop, my hand considering its 
closing sentence, but the accounts have still to be made out 


71 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 




and tliis letter issued with its travelling expenses! You may 
assume that I won’t be announcing the source I intend 
borrowing from - you know whose funds I’m drawing on! 
Give me a fraction more time and payment will be made 
out of my own pocket. In the meantime Epicurus will 
oblige me, with the following saying: ‘Rehearse death , or- 
the idea may come across to us rather more satisfactorily u 
put in this form - ‘It is a very good thing to familiarize one- 
self -with death.’ You may possibly think it unnecessary to 
learn something which' you will only have to put mto 
practice once. That is the very reason why we ought to ot 
practising it. We must needs continually study a thing if 
are not in a position to test whether we know it. Rehearse 
death.’ To say this is to tell a person to rehearse his freedom, 
person who has learned how to die has unlearned how to be 
a slave. He is above, or at any rate beyond the reach of, an 
poHtical powers. What are prisons, warders, bars to him? 
has an open door. There is but one chain holding us m 
fetters, and that is our love of life. There is no need to cast 
this love out altogether, but it does need to be lessened sorne- 
what so that, in the event of circumstances ever demanding 
this, nothing may stand in the way of our being prepared to 
do at once what we must do at some time or other. 


LETTER XXVII 

‘So you’re giving me advice, are you?’ you say. ‘Have you 
already given yourself advice, then? Have you already put 
yourself straight? Is that how you come to have time for 
reforming other people?’ No, I’m not so shameless as to set 
about treating people when I’m sick myself. I’m talking to 
you as if I were lying in the same hospital ward, about the 

72. 



LETTER XXVn 


xxvn, 5 

illness we’re both suffering from, and passing on some reme- 
dies. So listen to me as if I were speaking to myself. I’m 
allowing you access to my inmost self, calling you in to advise 
me as I have things out with myself I proclaim to my own 
self: ‘Count your years and you’ll be ashamed to be wanting 
and working for exactly the same things as you wanted when 
you were a boy. Of this one tiling make sure against your 
d}nng day - that your faults die before you do. Have done 
with those unsettled pleasures, which cost one dear - they do 
one harm after they’re past and gone, not merely when tliey’re 
in prospect. Even when they’re over, pleasures of a depraved 
nature are apt to carry feelings of dissatisfaction, in the same 
way as a criminal’s anxiety doesn’t end with the commission 
of the crime, even if it’s undetected at the time. Such pleasures 
are insubstantial and unreHable; even if they don’t do one 
any harm, they’re fleeting in character. Look around for 
some enduring good instead. And nothing answers diis 
description except what the spirit discovers for itself within 
itself. A good character is the only guarantee of everlasting, 
carefree happiness. Even if some obstacle to this comes on the 
scene, its appearance is only to be compared to that of clouds 
which drift in front of the sim without ever defeating its 
light.’ 

How soon will you be fortunate enough to attain to this 
happiness? "Well, you haven’t been dragging your steps up 
till now, but your pace could be increased. There’s a lot of 
work remaining to be done, and if you want to be successful 
you must devote all your waking hours and all your efforts 
to the task personally. This is not something that admits of 
delegation. It is a different branch of learning which has room 
for devilling. There was a rich man called Cdvisius Sabinus, in 
ttiy own hfetime, who had a freedman’s brains along with a 
freedman’s fortune. I have never seen greater vulgarity in a 
successful man. His memory was so bad that at one moment 


73 



xxvn, 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC 


or another the names of Ulysses, or Achilles, or Priam 
characters he knew as well as we knew our early teachers 
would slip his memory. No doddering butler ever wen 
through the introductions of a mass of callers coramittini 
quite such solecisms - not announcing people’s names sc 
much as foisting names on them - as Sabinus did with the 
Greek and Trojan heroes. But this didn't stop him wanting tc 
appear a well-read man. And to this end he thought up the 
following short cut: lie spent an enormous amount of 
money on slaves, one of them to know Homer by heart, 
another to know Hesiod, while he assigned one apiece to 
each of the nine lyric poets.* That the cost was enormous is 
hardly surprising : not having found what he wanted in the 
market he had them made to order. After this collection of 
slaves had been procured for him, he began to give his 
dinner guests nightmares. He would have these fellows at 
his elbow so that he could continually be turning to them for 
quotations from these poets which he might repeat to the 
company, and then - it happened frequently - he would 
break down halfway through a word. Satehius Quadrates, 
who regarded stupid millionaires as fair game to be sponged 
oflf, and consequently also fair game for flattery, as well as - 
and this goes wdth the other two things - fair game for 
facetiousness at their expense, suggested to him tlut < 
should keep a team of scholars ‘to pick up the bits , Oi 
Sabinus’ letting it be known that the slaves had set him hac ^ 
a hundred thousand sesterces apiece, he said: ‘Yes, for 
than that you could have bought the same number of boo 
cases.’ Sabinus was none the less quite convinced that w 
anyone in his household knew he knew personally. It was 
Satellius, again, who started urging Sabinus, a pale and ski^y 
individual whose health was poor, to take up wrest g- 
* Alcaeus, Sappho, Stcsichorus, Ibycus, Bacchylidcs, Simonides, 
Aleman, Anacreon, Pindar. 


74 


xxvm, 2 


LETTER XXVIII 


When Sabinus retorted: *How can I possibly do that? It’s 
as much as I can do to stay alive’, SateUius answered: ‘Now 
please, don’t say that ! Look how many slaves you’ve got in 
perfect physical condition!’ A sound mind can neither be 
bought nor borrowed. And if it were for sale, I doubt 
whether it would find a buyer. And yet unsound ones are 
being purchased every day. 

But let me pay you what I owe you and say goodbye. 

Poverty brought into accord with the law of nature is 
wealth.’ Epicurus is constantly saying this in one way or an- 
other. But something that can never be learnt too thoroughly 
can never be said too often. With some people you only 
need to point to a remedy; others need to have it rammed 
into them. 


LETTER XXVIII 

Do you think you are the only person to have had this 
experience? Are you really surprised, as if it were something 
unprecedented, that so long a tour and such diversity of 
scene have not enabled you to throw off this melancholy and 
diis feeling of depression? A change of character, not a change 
of air, is. what you need. Though you cross the boundless 
Ocean, though, to use the words of ouir poet Virgil, 

Lands and towns are left astern,* 

whatever your destination you wfil be followed by your 
anings. Here is what Socrates said to someone who was 
niaking the same complaint: ‘How can you wonder your 
travels do you no good, when you carry yourself around with 
you? You' are saddled with the very thing that drove you 
s^way. How can novelty of surroimdings abroad and be- 

*Aenetd,IIl:j2. 


75 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC xxvin;2 

coming acquainted with foreign scenes or dties be of any 
help? All that dashing about ttums out to be quite futile. An^ 
if you want to know why all this running away cannot help 
you, the answer is simply this: you are running away in your 
own company. You have to lay aside the load on your spirit. 
Until you do that, nowhere will satisfy you. Imagine your 
present state as being like that of the prophetess whom our 
Virgil represents in a roused and excited state, largely taken 
over by a spirit not her own: 

The Sibyl raves about as one possessed, 

In hopes she may dislodge the mighty god 
Within her bosom.* 


You rush hither and thither with the idea of dislodging a 
firmly seated weight when the very dashing about just adds 
to the trouble it causes you - like the cargo in a ship, which 
does not weigh her down imduly so long as it does not shift, 
but if it rolls more to one side than the other it is liable to 
carry the side on which it settles dovm into the water. What- 
ever you do is bad for you, the very movement in itself being 
harmful to you since you are in fact shaking up a sick man. 

Once you have rid yourself of the affliction there, though, 
every change of scene will become a pleasure. You may be 
banished to the ends of the earth, and yet in whatever out- 
landish comer of the world you may find yourself stationed, 
you will find that place, whatever it may be like, a hospitable 
home. Where you arrive does not matter so much as what 
sort of person you are when you arrive there. We ought not, 
therefore, to give over our hearts for good to any one part o 
the world. We should live with the conviction: T wasnt 
■ bom for one particular comer: the whole world’s my home 
country.’ If the truth of that were clear to you, you would not 
be surprised that the diversity of new surroundings for which, 

* Aeneid, VI: 78-9. 

76 



xxvm, 10 


LETTER XXVIII 

out of weariness of the old, you are constantly heading fails 
to do you any good. Whichever you first came to would have 
satisfied you if you had believed you were at home in all. As 
It is, instead of travelling you are rambling and drifting, 
exchanging one place for another when the thing you are 
looking for, the good Hfe, is available everywhere. 

Could there be a scene of greater turmoil than the City? Yet 
even there, if need be, you ar? free to lead a life of peace. 
Given a free choice of posting, though, I should flee a long 
way from the vicinity, let alone the sight of the City. For in 
the same way as there are unpleasant climates which are 
trying even to the most robust constitutions, there are others 
which are none too wholesome for the mind, even though it 
be a sound one, when it is stiU in an imperfect state and 
building up its strength. I do not agree with those who 
^commend a stormy life and plunge straight into the 
breakers, waging a spirited struggle against wordly obstacles 
every day of their hves. The wise man will put up with 
these things, not go out of his way to meet them; he will 
prefer a state of peace to a state of war. It does not profit a 
tnan much to have managed to discard his own failings if he 
must ever be at loggerheads with other people’s. ‘Socrates,’ 
they will tell you, ‘had the Thirty Tyrants standing over him 
and yet they could not break his spirit.’ What difference does 
It make how many masters a man has? Slavery is only one, 
atid yet the person who refuses to let the thought of it affect 
him is a free man no matter how great the swarm of masters 
around him. 

h is time I left off - not before I have paid the usual duty, 
^otigh! ‘A consciousness of wrongdoing is the first step to 
salvation.’ This remark of Epicurus’ is to me a very good one. 
Por a person who is not aware that he is doing anything 
Wrong has no desire to be put right. You have to catch your- 
self doing it before you can reform. Some people boast about 


77 



letters from a stoic xxvin,I0 

their failings: can you imagine someone who counts his faults 
as merits ever giving thought to their cure? So - to the best 
o your a i ity - demonstrate your own guilt, conduct in- 
quiries o your own into all the evidence against yourself 
Way the part first of prosecutor, then of judge and finally of 
pleader m mitigation. Be harsh with yourself at times. 


letter xxxiir 

You feel that my present letters should be like my earlier 
ones and have odd sayings of leading Stoics appended to 
em. But they never busied themselves with philosophical 
gems. Their whole system is too virile for that. When things 
stand out and attract attention in a work you ran be sure 
there is an uneven quality about it. One tree by itself never 
caUs for admiration when the whole forest rises to the same 
height. Poetry is replete with such things; so is history. So 
please don t think them peculiar to Epicurus ; they are general, 
and ours more than anyone’s, although they receive more 
notice in him because they occur at widely scattered intervals, 
because they are unlooked for, and because it is rather a 
surprise to find spirited sayings in a person who — so most 
people consider — was an advocate of soft living. In my own 
view, Epicurus was actually, in spite of his long sleeves, a 
man of spirit as well. Courage, energy and a warlike spirit 
are as commonly given to Persians as to people with a style 
of dress more suited to action. 

So there s no call- for you to press for stock excerpts, seeing 
that the sort of thing which in the case of other thinkers is 
excerpted is in our case continuous writing. That’s why we 
don t go in for that business of window-dressing; we don t 
mislead the customer, so that when he enters the shop he 

78 



LETTER XXXIII 


xxxni, 6 

finds nothing in stock apart from the things on display in 
the window. We allow him to pick up samples firom wherever 
he likes. And suppose we did want to separate out individual 
aphorisms from the mass, whom should we attribute them 
to? Zeno? Cleanthes? Chrysippus? Panaetius? Posidonius? 
We Stoics are no monarch’s subjects; each asserts his own 
fireedom. Among Epicureans whatever Hermarchus or 
Metro dorus says is credited to one man alone; everything 
ever said by any member of that firatemity was uttered luider 
the authority and auspices of one person. I say again, then, 
that for us, try as we may, it is impossible to pick out indi- 
vidual items from so vast a stock in which each thing is as 
good as the next. 

The poor man. ’tis that counts his flock.* 

Wherever you look your eye will light on things that might 
stand out if everything around them were not of equal 
standard. 

So give up this hope of being able to get an idea of the 
genius of the greatest figures by so cursory an approach. You 
have to examine and consider it as a whole. There is a sequence 
about the creative process, and a work of genius is a synthesis 
of its individual features from which nothing' can be sub- 
tracted without disaster. I have no objection to your inspect- 
nig the components indmdually provided you do so without 
detaching them from the personality they actually belong to; 
a woman is not beautiful when her ankle or arm wins com- 

diverts admiration 

Still, if you press me I won’t treat you so meanly — open- 
handed generosity it shall be. There is a mass of such things, 
an enormous mass of them, lying all over the place, needing 
only to be picked up as distinct from gadiered up; They come, 

* Ovid, Metamorphoses, Xin:824. 

79 


plhnents, but when her total appearance 
from the individual parts of her body. 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 


xxm,6 


not in dribs and drabs, but in a closely interconnected and 
continuous stream. I have no doubt, too, they may be ver}’’ 
helpful to the uninitiated and those who are still novices, for 
individual aphorisms in a small compass, rounded off in 
um ts rather like lines of verse, become fixed more readily in 
the mind. It is for this reason that we give children proverbs 
and what the Greeks call chriac* to learn by heart, a child s 
mind being able to take these in at a stage when anything 
more xvould be heyond its capacity. But in the case of a 
grown man who has made incontestable progress it is dis- 
graceflil to go hunting after gems of wisdom, and prop him- 
self up w’ith a minute number of the best-knovm sayings, 
and be dependent on his memory as well; it is time he was 
standing on his own feet. He should be delivering himself of 
such sayings, not memorizing them. It is disgraceful that a 
man who is old or in sight of old age should have a wisdom 
deriving solely from his notebook. ‘Zeno said this.’ And what 
have you said? ‘Cleanthcs said that.’ What have you said? 
How much longer are you going to serve imder others 
orders? Assume authority yourself and utter something that 
may be handed down to posterity. Produce something &om 
your own resources. 

This is why I look on people like this as a spiritless lot - 
the people who are forever acting as interpreters and never as 
creators, always lurking in someone else’s shadow. They never 
venture to do for themselves the things they have spent such a 
long time learning. They exercise their memories on dungs 
that are not their own. It is one thing, however, to remember, 
another to know. To remember is to safeguard something 
entrusted to your memory, whereas to know, by contrast, 
is actually to make each item your own, and not to be depen- 
dent on some original and be constantly looking to sec what 
the master said. ‘Zeno said this, Clcanthes that.’ Lets have 

*Apophthegms. 

8o 



LETTER XXXVIII 


xxxvm, I 

some difference betv>'een you and die books! How much 
longer are you going to be a pupil? From now on do some 
teaching as well. Why, after all, should I listen to what I can 
read for myself? ‘The living voice,’ it may be answered, 
‘counts for a great deal.’ Not when it is just acting in a kind 
of secretarial capacity, making itself an instrument for what 
others have to say. 

A further point, too, is that these people who never attain 
independence follow the views of their predecessors, first, 
in matters in which everyone else without exception has 
abandoned the older authority concerned, and secondly, in 
matters in which investigations are still not complete. But no 
new findings will ever be made if we rest content with the 
findings of the past. Besides, a man. who follows someone 
else not only does not find anything, he is not even looking. 
‘But surely you are going to walk in your predecessors’ 
footsteps?’ Yes indeed, I shall use the old road, but if I find a 
shorter and easier one I shall open it up. The men who 
pioneered the old routes are leaders, not our masters. Truth 
lies open to everyone. There has yet to be a monopoly of 
truth. And there is plenty of it left for future generations too. 


- LETTER XXXVIII 

You. are quite right in urging that we should exchange 
letters oftener. The utmost benefit comes from talk because 
it steals little by little into the mind. Lectures prepared before- 
hand and delivered before a listening audience are more re- 
sounding but less intimate. Philosophy is good advice, and 
no one gives advice at the top of his voice. Such harangues, if I 
may call them that, may need to be resorted to now and then 
where a person in a state of indecision is needing a push. But 

8i 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC xxxvffl,! 

when, the object is not to make him want to leam but to get 
him learning, one must have recourse to these lower tones, 
which enter the mind more easily and stick in it. What is 
required is not a lot of words but effectual ones. 

Words need to be sown like seed. No matter how tiny a’ 
seed may be, when it lands in the right sort of ground it 
unfolds its strength and from being minute expands and grows 
to a massive size. Reason does the same; to the outward eye 
its dimensions may be insignificant, but with activity it 
starts developing. Although the words spoken are few, if the 
mind has taken them in as it should they gather strength and 
shoot upwards. Yes, precepts have the same features as seeds: 
they are of compact dimensions and they produce impressive 
results - given, as L say, the right sort of mind, to grasp at 
and assimilate them. The mind will then respond by being m 
its turn creative and will produce a yield exceeding what was 
put into it. 


LETTER XL 

Thank you for writing so often. By doing so you give me a 
glimpse of yourself in the only way you can. I never get a 
letter firom you without instantly feeling we’re together, n 
pictures of absent friends are a source of pleasure to us, re- 
fireshing the memory and relieving the sense of void with a 
solace however insubstantial and unreal, how much more so 
are letters, which carry marks and signs of the absent frien 
that are real. For the handwriting of a friend affords us what is 
so delightful about seeing him again, the sense of recognition. 

You say in your letter that you went and heard the 
sopher Serapio when his ship put in where you are. 
words,’ you say, *tend to be tumbled out at a tremen oos 

8z 



LETTER XL 


XL, 5 

pace, pounded and driven along rather than poured out, for 
they come in a voliune no one voice could cope with/ I do 
not approve of this in a philosopher, whose delivery - like 
his Hfe - should be well-ordered; nothing can be well-regu- 
lated if it is done in a breakneck hurry. That is why in Homer 
the impetuous type of eloquence which he compares to snow 
that keeps on coming down without a break, is given to the 
orator, while from the old man there comes a gentle elo- 
quence that ‘flowed sweeter than honey’.* You should take 
the view, then, that this copious and impetuous energy in a 
speaker is better suited to a hawker than to someone who 
deals with a subject of serious importance and is also a teacher. 

Yet I am just as much against his words coming in a trickle 
as in a stream. He should not keep people’s ears on the 
stretch any more than he should swamp them. For the other 
extreme of thinness and poverty means less attentiveness on 
the part of the listener as he becomes tired of this slowness 
with all its interruptions. Nonetheless what is waited for 
does sink in more readily than what goes flying past; one 
speaks in any event of instruction as being handed on to 
those being taught, and something that escapes them is 
hardly being handed on. 

Language, moreover, which devotes its attention to truth 
ought to be plain and unadorned. This popular style- has 
nothing to do with truth. Its object is to sway a mass audience, . 
to carry away unpractised ears by the force of its onslaught. 
It never submits itself to detailed discussion, is just wafted 
away. Besides, how can a thing possibly govern others when 
it cannot be governed itself? And apart from all this surely 
language which is directed to the healing of men’s minds 
needs to penetrate into one? Medicines do no good unless 
they stop some length of time in one. There is, moreover, a 
great deal of futility and emptiness about this style of speak- 
* Iliad, 111:222 and 1:249. ^ 

83 



LETTERS PROM A STOIC XL,5 

mv tlmt, about it than efFcctiven«s.Thcreare 

to be rlicn V incitements to be quelled, illusions 

reortaTj “ ’>'= ^‘>='=^04 g„ed to be 

mrrt ' ‘>'= 4 one “ a hurty? 

add tor> merely in passing? One might 

sul’ f *“'= “ "" any pleasure to be found k 

sucn a nouy promiscuous torrent of words. Just as with a lot 

f ^gs that one would never believe possible one finds it 

with ^ave seen them once proved possible, so 

h these performers with words, to have heard them once 
a more than enough. What is there in them, after all, that 
yonc codd wtmt to learn or imitate? What view is one 

' ^ A person’s mind when bis speech 

IS wdd and incoherent and knows no restraint? 

IS rapidity of utterance recalls a person running down a 
^ ope an unable to stop where he meant to, being carried on 
instead a Jot farther than he intended, at the mercy ofhis body’s 
momentum, it is out of control, and unbecoming to phulo- 
sop y, which should be placing her words, not throwing 
them around, and moving forward step by step. ‘But surely 
s e cm move on to a higher plane now and then as well?’ 

ertai y, but it must be without prejudice to her dignity of 
c aracter, and this vehement, excessive energy strips her of 
t at. Power she should have, great power, but it should he . 
controlled: she should be a never-failing stream, not a spate. 

Even in an advocate I should be loth to allow such uncontrol- 
lable speed in delivery, all in an unruly rush; how could a 
ju ge (who is not uncommonly, too, inexperienced 2nd un- 
qualified) be expected to keep up with it? Even on the occa- 
sions when an advocate is carried away by an ungovernable 
passion or a desire to display his powers, he should not in- 
crease his pace and pile on the words beyond the capacity of 
theear. 

You will be doing the right thing, therefore, if you do not 

84 



LETTER XL 


XL. 13 

go to listen to people who are more concerned about the 
quantity than the quahty of what they say, and choose your- 
self - if you have to - to speak in the manner of PubHus 
Vinicius. When Asellius was asked how Vinicius spoke, he 
described it as being ‘at a slow pace’. Geminus Varius in 
fact remarked, ‘How you can call the man eloquent I simply 
don’t know - he can’t string three words together.’ Is there 
any reason why of the two you should not choose Vinicius’ 
style? You can expect to be interrupted by persons with as 
little taste as the one who, when Vinicius was jerking the 
words out one by one, as if he were dictating rather than 
speaking, exclaimed, ' ‘I call on the speaker to speak.’ The 
pace of Quintus Haterius, a celebrated speaker of his day, is 
something I should have a sensible man keep well clear of: 
with him there was never a hesitation or a pause, only one 
start and only one stop. 

But I also think that certain styles are suitable in a greater 
or lesser degree to different nationalities. In a Greek one will 
tolerate this lack of discipline, while we have acquired the 
habit. of punctuating what we say, in writing as well as 
speech. Our own Cicero, too, from whom Roman oratory 
really sprang, was a steady goer. Roman discourse is more 
given to self-examination, appraising itself and inviting 
appraisal. Fabianus, who added outstanding oratory to those 
more important distinctions of his, his way of life and his 
learning, woxild discuss a subject with dispatch rather than 
with haste. You might describe his oratory as being not 
rapid but fluent. This I am ready to see in a philosopher, but 
I do not insist on it; his dehvery is not to be haltmg, but I 
should rather have the words issued forth than flowing forth. 
And a further reason I have for warning you against that 
disease is the fact that you can only acquire it successfully if 
you cease to feel any sense of shame. You really need to give 
the skin of your face a good rub and then not listen to your- 

85 



XI, 13 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC 

self! For that unguarded pace will give rise to a lot of ex- 
pressions of which you would otherwise be critical. You 
cannot, I repeat, successfully acquire it and preserve your 
modesty at the same time. One needs, moreover, constant 
daily practice for it. It requires a switch of attention, too, from 
subject-matter to words. And even if it does transpire that 
the words come readily to the tongue and are capable of reel- 
ing off it without any effort on your part, they will still need 
to be regulated. A way of speaking which is restrained, not 
bold, suits a wise man in the same way as an unassuming sort 
of walk does. The upshot, then, of what I have to say is this: 

I am telling you to be a slow-speaking person. 


LETTER XLI 

You are doing the finest possible thing and acting in your 
best interests if, as you say in your letter, you are persevermg 
in your efforts to acquire a sound understanding. This is 
something it is foolish to pray for when you can win it 
from your own self. There is no need to raise our hands to 
heaven; there is no need to implore the temple warden to 
allow us close to the ear of some graven image, as thougn 
this increased the chances of our being heard. God is n^ 
you, is writh you, is inside you. Yes, Lucihus, there resides 
within us a divine spirit, which guards us and watches us m 
the evil and the good we do. As we treat him, so will e 
treat us. No man, indeed, is good without God - is any one 
capable of rising above fortune unless he has help from God. 
He it is that prompts us to noble and exalted endeavours, in 
each and every good man 

A god (what god we are uncertain) dwells.* 

* Virgil, Aeneid, Vin:352. 

8<5 



XU, 5 


LETTER XLI 


If you have ever come on a dense wood of ancient trees 
that have risen to an exceptional height, shutting out all 
sight of the sky with one thick screen of branches upon 
another, the loftiness of the forest, the seclusion of the spot, 
your sense of wonderment at finding so deep and unbroken 
a gloom out of doors, will persuade you of the presence of a 
deity. Any cave in which the rocks have been eroded deep 
into the mountain resting on it, its hollowing out into a 
cavern of impressive extent not produced by the labours of 
men but the result of processes of nature, wiU strike into , your 
soul some kind of inkling of the divine. We venerate the 
sources of important streams; places where a mighty river 
bursts suddenly from hiding are provided with altars; hot 
springs are objects of worship ; the darkness or unfathomable 
depth of pools has made their waters sacred. And if you come 
across a man who is never alarmed by dangers, never affected 
by cravings, happy in adversity, calm in the midst of storm, 
viewing mankind from a higher level and the gods from their 
own, is it not likely that a feeling will find its way into you of 
veneration for him? Is it not likely that you will say to your- 
self, ‘Here is a thing which is too great, too sublime for any- 
one to regard it as being in the same sort of category as that 
puny body it inhabits.’ Into that body there has descended a 
divine power. The soul that is elevated and well regulated, 
that passes through any experience as if it counted for com- 
paratively little, that smiles at all the things we fear or pray 
for, is impelled by a force that comes from heaven. A thing 
of that soul’s height cannot stand without the prop of a 
deity. Hence the greater part of it is situated where it descends 
from; in the same way as the sim’s rays touch the earth but 
are really situated at the point from which they emanate, a 
soul possessed of greamess and holiness, which has been sent 
down into this world in order that we may gain a nearer 
knowledge of tlie divine, associates with us, certainly, but 

87 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XU, 5 

never loses contact "with its source. On that source it depends; 
that is the direction in which its eyes turn, and the direction 
it strives to climb in; the manner in which it takes part in 
our affairs is that of a superior being. 

What, then, is this soul? Something which has a lustre 
that is due to no quality other than its own. Could anything 
be more stupid than to praise a person for something that is 
not his? Or more crazy than admiring things which in a 
single moment can be transferred to another? It is not a 
golden bit that makes one horse superior to others. Sending a 
hon into the arena with his mane gilded, tired by the handling 
he has been given in the process of being forced to submit to 
this embellishment, is a very different thing from sending in a 
wild one with his spirit unbroken. Bold in attack, as nature 
meant him to be, in all his unkempt beauty, a beast whose 
glory it is that none can look on him without fear, he stands 
higher in people’s eyes than the other, docile, gold-leaf 
coated creature. 

No one should feel pride in anydiing that is not his own. 
We praise a vine if it loads its branches with fruit and bends 
its very props to the ground with the weight it carries; would 
any one prefer the famous vine that had gold grapes and 
leaves hanging on it? Fruitfulness is the vine’s peculiar virtue. 
So, too, in a man praise is due only to what is his very ot^* 
Suppose he has a beautiful home and a handsome collection 
of servants, a lot of land under cultivation and a lot of money 
out at interest; not one of these things can be said to be m 
him - they are just things around him. Praise in him what can 
neither be given nor snatched away, what is peculiarly a 
man’s. ■ _ ^ 

You ask what that is? It is his spirit, and the perfection o 
his reason in that spirit. For man is a rational animal. Man s 
ideal state is realized when he has fulfilled the purpose or 
which he was bom. And what is it that reason demands o 

88 



XXVI, 2 


LETTER XLVI 


him? Something very easy - that he live in accordance with 
his owm nature. Yet this is turned into something difEcult 
hy the madness tliat is universal among men; we push one 
another into vices. And how can people be called back to 
spirimal weU-bcing when no one is tr)nng to hold diem back 
and the crowd is urging them’ on? 


LETTER XLVI 

The book you promised me has come. I was intending to 
read it at my convenience and I opened it on arrival without 
meaning to do any more than just get an idea of its contents. 
The next thing I knew die book itself had charmed me into 
a deeper reading of’it there and then. How lucid its style is 
you may gather from the fact that I found the work light 
reading, although a first glance might well convey the 
impression that the writer was someone like Livy or Epicurus, 
its bulk being rather unlike you or me ! It was so enjoyable, 
though, that I found myself held and drawn on until I 
ended up having read it right through to the end without a 
break. All the time the sunshine was inviting me out, hunger 
prompting me to eat, the weather threatening to break, but I 
gulped it aU down in one sitting. 

It was a joy, not just a pleasure, to read it. There was so 
much talent and spirit about it - I’d have said ‘forcefulness’, 
too, if it had been written on a quieter plane now and then and 
periodically raised on to a higher one; as it was, there was no 
such forcefulness, but instead there was a sustamed evenness 
of style. The writing was pure and virUe - and yet not lacking 
in that occasional entertaining touch, that bit of light relief 
at the appropriate moment. The quality of nobility, of sub- 
I-S.-5 89 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XLVJ,2 

Jimity, you have; I want you to keep it, and to carry on just 
the way you're doing. 

Your subject, also, contributed to the result - which is a 
reason why you should always select a fertile one, one that 
wi engage the mind s attention and stimulate it. But I’ll 
tvritc and say more aljout the book when I've gone over it 
again. At the moment my judgement isn't really a sufficiently 
settled one - it s as if I'd heard it all rather than read it. You 
must let me go into it thoroughly, too. You needn't he 
apprehensive, you 11 bear nothing but the truth. How 
fortunate you are in possessing nothing capable of inducing 
nnyone to tell you a lie over a distance as great as the one that 
separates us — except that even in these circumstances, when 
all reason for it is removed, we stiU find habit a reason for 
telling lies ! 


LETTER XLVII 

I M glad to hear, from these people who've been visiting 
you, that you live on friendly terms with your slaves. It is 
just what one expects of an enhghtened, cultivated person 
like yourself. ‘They're slaves,’ people say. No. They’re human 
beings. They re slaves. But they share the same roof as 
ourselves. ‘They’re slaves.' No, , they’re friends, humble 
friends. They re slaves.' Strictly speaking they're our 
fellow-slaves, if you once reflect that fortune has as much 
power over us as over them. 

This is why I laugh at those people who think it degrading 
for a man to eat with his slave. Why do they think it degrad- 
ing? Only because the most arrogant of conventions has 
decreed that the master of the house be surrounded at his 
dinner by a crowd of slaves, who have to stand around while 
he eats more than be can bold, loading an already distended 

po 



LETTER XLVII 


XLvn, 7 

belly in his' monstrous greed until it proves incapable any 
longer of performing the function of a belly^ at which point 
he expends more effort in vomiting everything up than he 
did in forcing it down. And all this time the poor slaves are 
forbidden to move their lips to speak, let alone to eat. The 
slightest murmur is checked with a stick; not even accidental 
soimds like a cough, or a sneeze, or a hiccup are let off a 
bearing. All night long they go on standing about, dinnb 
and hungry, paying grievously for any interruption. 

The result is that slaves who cannot talk before his face 
talk about him behind , his back. The slaves of former days, 
however, whose mouths were not sealed up like this, who 
were able to make conversation not only in the presence of 
their master but actually with him, were ready to bare their 
necks to the executioner for him, to divert on to themselves 
any danger that threatened him; they talked at dinner but 
under torture they kept their mouths shut. It is just this high- 
handed treatment which is responsible for the frequently 
heard saying, ‘You’ve as many enemies as you’ve slaves.’ 
They are not our enemies when we acquire them; we make 
them so. ' 

For the moment I pass over other instances of our harsh 
and inhuman behaviour, the way we abuse them as if they 
were beasts of burden instead of human beings, the way for 
example, from the time we take our places on the dinner 
couches, one of them mops up the spittle and another stationed 
at the foot of the couch collects up the ‘leavings’" of the 
drunken diners. Another carves the costly game birds, slicing 
off choice pieces from the breast and rump with the unerring 
strokes of a trained hand - unhappy man, to exist for the one 
and only purpose of carving a fat bird in the proper style - 
although the person who learns the technique from sheer 
necessity is not quite so much to be pitied as the person who 
gives demonstrations of it for pleasure’s sake. Another, the 


91 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XLVH,? 

one who serves the wine, is got up like a girl and engaged in a 
with his years ; he cannot get away from his boyhood, 
but is dragged back to it all the time; although he already has 
the figure of a soldier, he is kept free of hair by having it 
rubbed away or pulled out by the roots. His sleepless night is 
divided between his master’s drunkenness and sexual pleasures, 
boy at the table, man in the bedroom. Another, who has the 
privilege of rating each guest’s character, has to go on stand- 
ing where he is, poor fellow, and watch to see whose powers 
of flattery and absence of restraint in appetite or speech are to 
secure them an invitation for the following day. Add to these 
the caterers with their highly developed knowledge of their 
master’s palate, the men who know the flavours that will 
sharpen his appetite, know what will appeal to his eyes, 
what novelties can tempt his stomach when it is becoming 
queasy, what dishes he will push aside with the eventual 
coming of sheer satiety, what he will have a craving for on 
that particular day. 

These are the people with whom a master cannot tolerate 
the thought of taking his dinner, assuming that to sit down at 
the same table with one of his slaves would seriously impan 
his dignity. ‘The very idea!’ he says. Yet have a look at the 
number of masters he has from the ranks of these very slaves. 
Take Callistus’ one-time master. I saw him once actually 
standing waiting at CaUistus’ door and refused admission 
while others were going inside, the very master who had 
attached a price-ticket to the man and put him up for sale 
along with other rejects from his household staff. There s a 
slave who has paid his master back - one who was pushed 
into the first lot, too, the batch on which the auctioneer is 
merely trying out his voice I Now it was the slave’s turn to 
strike his master off his hst, to decide that he’s not the sort of 
* Many ex-slaves had risen to high positions under Claudius and 
Nero. 


92 



LETTER XLVII 


XLVH, 14 

person he wants in his house. Calhstus’ master sold him, yes, 
and look how much it cost him ! 

How about reflecting that the person you call your slave 
traces his origin back to the same stock as yourself, has the 
same good sky above him, breathes as you do, Hves as you do, 
dies as you do? It is as easy for you to see in him a free-bom 
man as for him to see a slave in you. Remember the Varus 
disaster: many a man of the most distinguished ancestry, 
who was doing his mflitary service as the first step on the 
road to a seat in the Senate, was brought low by fortune, 
condemned by her to look after a steading, for example, or a 
flock of sheep. Now think contemptuously of these people’s 
lot in life, in whose very place, for all your contempt, you 
could suddenly find yourself. 

I don’t want to involve myself in an endless topic of 
debate by discussing the treatment of slaves, towards whom 
we Romans are exceptionally arrogant, harsh and insulting. 
But the essence of the advice I’d like to give is this: treat 
your inferiors in the way in which you would like to be 
treated by your own superiors. And whenever it strikes you 
how much power you have over your slave, let it also strike 
you that your own master has just as much power over you. 
‘I haven’t got a master,’ you say. You’re young yet; there’s 
always the chance that you’ll have one. Have you forgotten 
the age at which Hecuba became a slave, or Croesus, or the 
mother of Darius, or Plato, or Diogenes? Be kind and courte- 
ous in your dealings with a slave; bring him into your dis- 
cussions md conversations md your company generally. 
And if at this point all those people who have been spoilt 
by luxury raise an outcry protesting, as they wiU, ‘There 
couldn’t be anything more degrading, anything more dis- 
graceful’, let me just say that these arc the very persons I -will 
catch on occasion kissing the hand of someone else’s slave. 

Don’t you notice, too, how our ancestors took away all 


93 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC Xl.vn, 14 

odium from the master’s position and all that seemed insult- 
mg or degrading in the lot of the slave by railing the master 
father of the household’ and speaking of the slaves as 
members of the household’ (something which survives to 
this day in the mime)? They instituted, too, a holiday on 
which master and slave were to eat together, not as the only 
day this could happen, of course, but as one on which it was 
always to happen. And in the household they allowed the 
slaves to hold official positions and to exercise some jurisdio 
tion in it; in fact they regarded the household as a miniature 
republic. 

‘Do you mean to say,’ comes the retort, ‘that I’m to have 
each and every one of my slaves sitting at the table with me? 
Not at all, any more than you’re to invite to it everybody who 
isn’t a slave. You’re quite mistaken, though, if you imagine 
that I’d bar from the table certain slaves on the grounds of the 
relatively menial or dirty nature of their work - that muleteer, 
for example, or that cowhand. I propose to value them accord-. 
ing to their character, not their jobs. Each man has a character 
of his own choosing; it is chance or fate that decides his choice 
ofjob. Have some of them dine with you because they deserve 
it, others in order to make them so deserving. For if there s 
anything typical of the slave about them as a result of the low 
company they’re used to Hving in, it will be rubbed offithrough 
association with men of better breeding. 

You needn’t, my dear Ludlius, look for friends only in rho 
City or the Senate; if you keep your eyes open, you’ll find 
them in your own home. Good material often lies idle for 
want of someone to make use of it; just give it a trial. -A- 
who examines the saddle and bridle and not the animal itself 
when he is out to buy a horse is a fool; similarly, only sn 
absolute fool values a man according to his clothes, or accord- 
ing to his social position, which after all is only something 
that we wear like clothing. 


94 



LETTER XLVII 


XLVn, 20 

‘He’s a slave.’ But he may have die spirit of a free man. 
‘He’s a slave.’ But is that really to coimt against him? Show 
me a man who isn’t a slave; one is a slave to sex, another to 
money, another to ambition; all are slaves to hope or fear. I 
could show you a man who has been a Consul who is a 
slave to his ‘ little old woman’, a milhonaire who is the slave 
of a httle girl in domestic service. I could show you some 
highly aristocratic young men who are utter slaves to stage 
artistes. And there’s no state of slavery more disgraceful than 
one which is self-imposed. So you needn’t allow yourself to 
he deterred by the snobbish people I’ve been talking about 
from showing good humour towards your slaves instead of 
adopting an attitude of arrogant superiority towards them. 
Have them respect you rather than fear you. 

Here, just because I’ve said they ‘should respect a master, 
rather than fear him’, someone will tell us that I’m now invit- 
ing slaves to proclaim their freedom and bringing about their 
employers’ overthrow. ‘Are slaves to pay their “respects” 
like dependent followers or early morning callers? That’s 
what he means, I suppose.’ Anyone saying this forgets that 
what is enough for a god, in the shape of worship, cannot be 
too httle for a master. To be really respected is to be loved; 
and love and fear will not mix. That’s why I think you’re 
absolutely right in not wishing to be feared by your slaves, 
and in confining your lashings to verbal ones; as instruments 
of correction, beatings are for animals only. Besides, what 
annoys us does not necessarily do us any harm; but we masters 
•are apt to be robbed of our senses by mere passing fancies, to 
the point where our anger is called out by anything which 
fails to ansv»^er to our wdll. We assume tlie mental attitudes of 
tyrants. For diey too forget their- own strength and the help- 
lessness of others and grow white-hot with friry as if diey 
had received an injury, when all the time they are quite 
immune from any such danger through the sheer exaltedness 

95 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XLVn,20 

of their position. Nor indeed are they unaware of this; but it 
does not stop them seizing an opportunity of finding fault 
with an inferior and maltreating him for it; they receive an 
injury by way of excuse to do one themselves. 

But I won’t keep you any longer; you don’t need exhorta- 
tion. It is a mark of a good way of life tJiat, among other 
things, it satisfies and abides; bad behaviour, constantly 
changing, not for the better, simply into difierent forms, has 
none of this stability. 


LETTER XLVIII 

I SHALL reply later to the letter you sent me while you were 
on your journey - it was as long as the journey itself! I must 
first take myself aside and deliberate what advice I should give. 
For you yourself, before consulting me as you are doing, 
gave long thought to the question whether you should con- 
sult me at all, so I ought to be giving this question of advice 
far longer thought, on the principle that it takes you more 
time to solve a problem than to set it. Particularly when one 
course is to your interest and another to mine - or does tlus 
make me sound like an Epicurean again? No, if a thing is m 
your interest it is also in my own interest. Otherwise, if any 
matter that affects you is no concern of mine, I am not a 
fnend. Friendship creates a community of interest between 
us in everything. We have neither successes nor setbacks as 
individuals; our fives have a common end. No one can lead a 
happy fife if he thinks only of himself and turns everything 
to liis own purposes. You should five for the other person it 
you wish to five for yourself. The assiduous and scrupuloi^ 
cultivation of this bond, which leads to our associating with 

96 



XLXTO.y LETTER XLVIII 

our fcllow-men and believes in the existence of a common 
law for all mankind, contributes more tlian anything else to 
the maintenance of that more intimate bond I was mention- 
ing, friendship. A person who shares much with a fellow 
human being will share everything with a friend. 

What I should like those subtle tliinkers - you know the 
ones I mean, my peerless Lucilius — to teach me is this, what 
my duties are to a friend and to a man, rather than the number 
of senses in wliich the expression ‘friend’ is used and how 
many different meanings the word ‘man’ has. Before my 
very eyes wisdom and folly are taking their separate stands: 
which shall I join, whose side am I to follow? For one person 
‘man’ is equivalent to ‘friend’, for another ‘man’ and 
‘friend’ are far from being identified, and in making a friend 
one man will be seeking an asset while another will be making 
himself an asset to the other; and in the midst of all this what 
you people do for me is pull words about and cut up syllables. 
One is led to believe that unless one has constructed syllogisms 
of the craftiest kind, and reduced fallacies to a compact form 
in which a false conclusion is derived from a true premise, 
one will not be in a position to distinguish what one should 
aim at and what one should avoid. It makes one ashamed - 
that men of our advanced years should turn a thing as serious 
as this into a game. 

Mouse is a syllable, and a mouse nibbles cheese; therefore, 
a syllable nibbles cheese.’ Suppose for the moment I can’t 
detect the fallacy in that. What danger am I placed in by such 
lack of insight? What serious consequences are there in it for 
me? What I have to fear, no doubt, is the possibility, one of 
these days, of my catching a syllable in a mousetrap or even 
having my cheese eaten up by a book if I’m not careful. 
Unless perhaps the following train of logic is a more acute 
one: ‘Mouse is a syllable, and a syllable does not nibble cheese; 
therefore, a mouse does not nibble cheese.’ What chilrlish 


97 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC XLVIE,7 

fatuities these arc! Is this what we philosophers acquire 
wrinkles in our brows for? Is this what we let our beards 
grow long for? Is this what we teach with faces grave and 
pale? 

Shall I tell you what philosophy holds out to humanity? 
Counsel. One person is facing death, another is vexed by 
poverty, while another is tormented by wealth - whether 
his own or someone else’s; one man is appalled by his mis- 
fortunes while another longs to get away from his ovu 
prosperity; one man is suffering at the hands of men, another 
at the hands of the gods. What’s the point of concocting whim- 
sies for me of the sort I’ve just been mentioning? This isn t 
the place for fiin - you’re called in to help the unhappy. 
You’re pledged to bring succour to the shipwrecked, to those 
in captivity, to the sick, the needy and men who are just 
placing their heads beneath the executioner’s uplifted axe. 
Where are you off to? What are you about? The person you re 
engaging in word-play with is in fear - go to his aid. . . • 
All mankind are stretching out their hands to you on every 
side. Lives that have been ruined, lives that are on the way to 
ruin are appealing for some help; it is to you that they look 
for hope and assistance. They are begging you to extneate 
them from this awful vortex, to show them in their doubt 
and disarray the shining torch of truth. Tell them what nature 
has made necessary and what she has made superfluous. Tell 
them how simple are the laws she has laid down, and how 
straightforward and eryoyable life is for those who foflow 
them and how confused and disagreeable it is for others who 
put more trust in popular ideas than they do in nature. All 
right if you can point out to me where those puzzles are likely 
to bring such people relief. Which of them removes cravings 
or brings them under control? If only they were simply 

* The text for three or four words is corrupt to the point of being 
untranslatable. 


98 



XLVm, 12 LETTER XLVIII 

unhelpful! They’re acpially harmful. I’ll, give you the 
clearest proof whenever you like of their tendency to weaken 
and enfeeble even eminent talents once appHed to such 
quibbles. And when it comes to saying how they equip 
people proposing to do battle with fortune and what weapons 
they offer them, one hangs one’s head with shame. Is this the 
way to our supreme ideal? Do we get there by means of aU 
that ‘if X, Y, or if not Y, Z’ one finds in philosophy? And by 
means of quibbles that wovdd be shameful and discreditable 
even among persons occupying themselves with law reports? 
When you’re leading the person you’re questioning into a 
trap, aren’t you just making it look as if he has lost his case 
on a purely technical point of pleading? The praetor’s court, 
however, restores litigants losing in this way to their rightful 
position, and philosophy does the same for the people thus 
questioned. Why do philosophers like you i abandon the 
. magnificent promises you have made? After assuring nie in 
solemn terms that you will see to it that my eyes shall no 
more be overwhelmed by the glitter of gold than by the 
glitter of a sword, that I shall spurn with magnificent strength 
of purpose the things all other men pray for and the things all 
other men are afraid of, why do you have to descend to the 
schookoom AB C? What do you say? 

Is this the way to the heavens?* 

For that is what philosophy has promised me - that she will 
make me God’s equal. That’s the invitation and that’s what 
I’ve come for ; be as good as your word. 

Keep clear, then, my dear Lucilius, as far as you can, of the 
sort of quibbles and qualifications I’ve been mentioning in 
philosophers. Straightforwardness and simplicity are in 
keeping with goodness. Even if you had a large part of your 

* Sic itur ad astra? Virgil, Aetieid, IX:64i. 

99 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC XXVm, 12 

life remaining before you, you would have to organize it 
very economically to have enough for all the things that are 
necessary; as things are, isn’t it the height of folly to learn 
inessential things when time’s so desperately short ! 


LETTER LIII 

I WONDER whether there’s anything I couldn’t be persuaded 
into now, after letting myself be persuaded recently into 
taking a trip by sea. The sea was quite calm when we cast 
off. The sky was certainly heavily overcast, with the kind of 
dark clouds that generally break in a squall or downpour. 
But in spite of the uncertain, threatening skies, I thought it 
would be perfectly feasible to make it across the few miles 
from your Parthenope over to Puteoli. And so, with the 
object of getting the crossing over quicker, I headed straight 
for Nesis over the open water to cut out all the intervening 
curves of the coast-line. Now when I had got so far across 
that it made no odds whether I went on or turned back, fost 
of all the smoothness which had tempted me to my undoing 
disappeared. There was no storm as yet, but a heavy swell 
was running by then and the waves were steadily gettmg 
rougher- 1 began asking the helmsman to put me ashore some- 
where. He kept saying the coast was a rugged one without a 
haven anywhere and that there was nothing he feared quite 
so much in a storm as a lee shore. I was in far too bad a way, 
though, for any thought of possible danger to enter my head, 
as I was suffering the torments of that sluggish brand o 
seasickness that will not bring one relief, the kind that upsec 
the stomach without clearing it. So I put pressure on him and 
compelled him, wdly-nilly, to make for the shore. Once we 


100 



im, 6 


LETTER LIII 


were dose in there was no waiting on my part for anything 
to be done in the manner commended by Virgil, 


or 


Bows faced seawards 
Anchor cast from bow* 


Remembering my training as a long-standing devotee of 
cold badis, I dived into the sea in just the way a cold-water 
addict ought to - in my woolly clothes. You can imagine 
what I suffered as I crawled out over the rocks, as I searched 
for a route to safety or fought my way tliere.s It made me 
realize how right sailors are in being afraid of a lee shore. 
What I endured, in my inability to endure my then self, is 
beyond belief. You can take it from me that the reason 
Ulysses got himself wrecked everywhere was not' so much 
because Neptune was against him from the day he was bom, 
but because he was given to seasickness like me - it’ll take me 
twenty years to reach my destination, too, if I ever have to 
journey anywhere by sea ! 

As soon as I’d settled my stomach (for stomachs, as you 
know, aren’t clear of seasickness the moment they’re clear of 
the sea) and rubbed myself over with embrocation to put 
some life back into my body, I began to reflect how we are 
attended by an appalling forgetfulness of our weaknesses, 
even the physical ones which are continually bringing them- 
selves to our notice, and much more so with those that are 
not only more serious but correspondingly less apparent. A 
slight feverishness may deceive a person, but when it has 
developed to the point where a genuine fever is raging it will 
extract an admission that something is wrong from even a 
tough and hardened individual. Suppose our feet ache, with 
little needling pains in the joints: at this stage we pass it off 
and say we’ve sprained an ankle or strained something in 
* Aeneid, VI: 3 , 111:277. 


lOI 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC lin,6 


some exercise or other; while the disorder is in its indeter- 
minate, commencing phase, its name eludes us, but once it 
starts bending the feet in just the way an ankle-rack does and 
makes them both misshapen, we have to confess that weVe 
got the gout. 


With afflictions of the spirit, though, the opposite is the 
case: the worse a person is, the less he feels it. You needn’t 
feel surprised, my dearest Lucilius; a person sleeping lightly 
perceives impressions in his dreams and is sometimes, even, 
aware during sleep that he is asleep, whereas a heavy slumber 
blots out even dreams and plunges the mind too deep for 
consciousness of self. Why does no one admit his failings? 
Because he’s still deep in them. It’s the person who’s awakened 
who recounts his dream, and acknowledging one’s failings is 
a sign of health. So let us rouse ourselves, so that we may be 
able to demonstrate our errors. But only philosophy will 
wake us; only philosophy will shake us out of that heavy 
sleep. Devote yourself entirely to her. You’re worthy of her,* 
she’s worthy of you - fall into each other’s arms. Say a firm, 
plain no to every other occupation. There’s no excuse for 


your pursuing philosophy merely in moments when occasion 
allows. If you were sick you would take a rest firom attending 
to your personal affairs and drop your practice in the courts. 
And during a spell of improvement in your condition you 
wouldn’t look on any client as being so important that you d 


undertake his case in court. No, you’d devote your entue 
attention to recovering from your illness in the quickest 
possible time. Well, then, aren’t you going to do the same m 
these circumstances? Away with every obstacle and lea.ve 


yourself free to acquire a sound mind - no one ever attauis 
this if he’s busy with other things. Philosophy wields an 
authority of her own; she doesn’t just accept time, she grants 
one it. She’s not something one takes up in odd moment. 
She’s an active, full-time mistress, ever present and demand- 


102 



LETTER LIV 


uv, I 

ing. When some state or other offered Alexander a part of 
its territory and half of all its property he told them that ‘he 
hadn’t come to Asia with the intention of accepting whatever 
they cared to give him, but of letting them keep whatever 
he chose to leave them.’ Pliilosophy, likewise, tells all other 
occupations; ‘It’s not my intention to accept whatever time 
is left over from you; you shall have, instead, what I reject.’ 

Give your whole mind to her. Sit at her side and pay her 
constant court, and an enormous gap will widen between 
yourself and other men. You’ll end up far in advance of all 
mankind, and not far behind the gods themselves. Would 
you like to know what the actual difference between yourself 
and the gods will be? They will exist for longer. And yet 
to me what an indisputable mark it is of a great artist to have 
captured everything in a tiny compass; a wise man has as 
much scope before him as a god with all eternity in front of 
him. There is one thing, too, in which the wise man actually 
‘surpasses any god: a god has nature to thank for his immunity 
from fear, while the wise man can thank his own efforts for 
this. Look at that for an achievement, to have all the frailty 
of a human being and all the freedom from care of a god. 
Philosophy’s power to blunt all the blows of circumstance is 
beyond beUef. Never a missile lodges in her; she has strong, 
impenetrable defences; some blows she breaks the force of, . 
parrying them with the slack of her gown as if they w:ere 
trivial, others she flings off and hurls back at the sender. 


LETTER LIV 

III health - which had granted me quite a long spell of 
leave - has attacked me without warning again. ‘What kind 
of iU health?’ you’U be asking. And well you may, for there 

103 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC m,l 

isn t a single kind I haven’t experienced. There’s one particular 
ailment, though, for which I’ve always been singled out, so 
to speak. I see no reason why I should call it by its Greek 
name,* difficulty in breatliing being a perfectly good way of 
describing it. Its onslaught is of very brief duration - like a 
squall, it is generally over -within the hour. One could hardly, 
after all, expect anyone to keep on drawing his last breath for 
long, could one? I’ve been visited by all the troublesome or 
dangerous complaints there are, and none of them, in my 
opinion, is more unpleasant than this one - which is hardly 
surprising, is it, when you consider that with anything else 
you’re merely ill, while with this you’re constantly at your 
last gasp? This is why doctors have nicknamed it ‘rehearsing 
death’, since sooner or later the breath does just what it has 
been trying to do aU those times. Do you imagine that as I 
write this I must be feeling in high spirits at ha-wng escaped 
this time? No, it would be just as absurd for me to feel over- 
joyed at its being over - as if this meant I was a healthy man 
again - as it would be for a person to think he has won his 
case on obtaining an extension of time before trial. 

Even as I fought for breath, though, I never ceased to find 
comfort in cheerful and covurageous reflections. ‘What’s this? 

I said. ‘So death is having all these tries at me, is he? Let him, 
then ! I had a try at him a long while ago myself.’ ‘When was 
this?’ you’ll say. Before I was bom. Death is just not being. 
'What that is like I know already. It will be the same after me 
as it was before me. If there is any torment in the later state, 
there must also have been torment in the period before we 
saw the light of day; yet we never felt conscious of any dis- 
tress then. I ask you, wouldn’t you say that anyone who took 
the view that a lamp was worse off when it was put out than 
it was before it was fit was an utter idiot? We, too, are ht and 
put out. We suffer somewhat in the intervening period, but 
* i.e. its medical name, asthma. 


104. 



LV, I 


LETTER LV 


at either end of it tliere is a deep tranquillity. For, unless I’m 
mistaken, we are wrong, my dear Lucilius, in holding that 
death follows after, when in fact it precedes as well as suc- 
ceeds. Death is all that was before us. What does it matter, 
after all, whether you cease to be or never begin, when the 
result of either is that you do not exist? 

I kept on talking to myself in these and similar terms - 
silently, needless to say, words being out of the question. 
Then httle by little the affliction in my breathing, which was 
coming to be little more than a panting now, came on at 
longer intervals and slackened away. It has lasted on, all the 
same, and in spite of the passing of this attack, my breathing 
IS not yet coming naturally, I feel a sort of catch and hesitation 
in it. Let it do as it pleases, though, so long as the sighs aren’t 
heartfelt. You can feel assured on my score of this: I shall 
not be afraid when the last hour comes - I’m already prepared, 
not planning as much as a day-ahead. The man, though, whom 
you should admire and imitate is the one who finds it a joy to 
live and in spite of that is not reluctant to die. For where’s 
the virtue in going out when you’re really being thrown out? 
And yet there is this virtue about my case: I’m in the process 
of being thrown out, certainly, but the manner of it is as if I 
Were going out. And the reason why it never happens to a 
Wise man is that being thrown out signifies expulsion from a 
place one is reluctant to depart from, and there is nothing 
the wise man does reluctantly. He escapes necessity because 
he wills what necessity is going to force on him. 


LETTER LV 

I VE just this moment returned from a ride in my sedan- 
chair, feeling as tired as if I’d walked the whole distance 
instead of being seated all the way. Even to be carried for 


105 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC LV, l 

any length of time is hard work, and all the more so, I dare 
say, because it is unnatural, nature having given us legs with 
which to do our own walking, just as she gave us eyes with 
which to do our ownseeing. Softlivingimposes on us thepenalty 
of debility ; we cease to be able to do the things weVelong been 
grudging about doing. However, I was needing to give my 
body a shakmg up, either to dislodge some phlegm, perhaps, 
that had collected in my throat, or to have some thickness, 
due to one cause or another, in my actual breathing reduced 
by the motion, which iVe noticed before has done me some 
good. So I deliberately continued the ride for quite a long 
way, with the beach itself tempting me onwards. It sweeps 
round between Cumae and Servilius Vatia’s country house 
in a sort of narrow causeway with the sea on one side and a 
lagoon on the other. A recent storm had left it firm; for, as 
you know, a ^t-running heavy surf makes a beach flat and 
smooth, while a longish period of calm weather leads to a 
disintegration of this surface with the disappearance of the 
moisture that binds the particles of sand together. 

I had started looking around me in my usual way to see 
whether I could find anything I could turn to good account, 
when my eyes turned to the house which had once belonged 
to Vatia. This was the place where Vatia passed the latter 
part of his life, a wealthy man who had held the oflice of 
praetor but was famed for nothing but his life of retirement, 
and considered a fortunate man on that ground alone. For 
whenever a man was ruined through being a friend of Asmius 
Callus or an enemy of Sejanus, or devoted to Sejanus (for 
it came to be as dangerous to have been a follower of bis as it 
was to cross him), people used to exclaim, ‘Vatia, you re the 
only person who Imows how to live ! ’ What in fact he knew 
was how to hide rather than how to live. And there is a lot oi 
difference between your life being a retiring one and its bcmg 
a spineless one. I never used to pass this house while Vatia 

io6 



LETTER LV 


LV,7 

was alive without saying, ‘Here lieth Vatia.’ But philosophy, 
my dear Lucilius, is such a holy thing and inspires so much 
respect, that even something that resembles it has a specious 
appeal. Let a man retire and the common crowd will think 
of him as leading a life apart, free of all cares, self-contented, 
hving for himself, w^hen in fact not one of these blessings 
can be won by anyone other than the philosopher. He alone 
knows how to live for himself; he is the one, in fact, who 
knows the fundamental thing, how to live. The person who 
has run away from the world and his fellow-men, whose 
exile is due to the unsuccessful outcome of his own desires, 
who is unable to endure the sight of others more fortunate, 
who has taken to some place of hiding in his alarm like a 
timid, inert animal, he is not ‘living for himself’, but for his 
belly and his sleep and his passions - in utter 4egradation, in 
other words. The fact that a person is living for nobody does 
uot automatically mean that he is Hving for himself. Still, a 
persevering steadfasmess of purpose counts for a lot, so that 
even inertia if stubbornly maintained may carry a certain 
weight. 

I can’t give you any accurate information about the house 
itself. I only know the front of it and the parts in view, the 
parts that it displays even to passers-by. There are two arti- 
ficial grottoes, considerable feats of engineering, each as big 
as the most spacious hall, one of them not letting in the sun 
at all, the other retaining it right up imtil its setting. There is 
a grove of plane trees through the middle of which runs a 
stream flowing alternately, like a tide-race, into the sea and 
into the Acherusian Lake, a stream capable of supporting a 
stock of fish even if constantly exploited ; it is left alone, though, 
when the sea is open; only when bad weather gives the 
fishermen a holiday do they lay hands on this ready supply. 
But the most advantageous feature of the house is that it has 
Baiae next door; it eiyoys all the amenities of that resort and 

107 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC tV,7 

is free from its disadvantages. I can speak for these attractions 
from personal knowledge, and I am quite prepared to believe, 
too, that it is an all-the-year-round house, since it lies in the 
path of the western breeze, catching it to such an extent as to 
exclude Baiae from the benefit of it. Vatia seems to have been 
no fool in choosing this place as the one in which he would 
spend his retirement, sluggish and senile as that retirement 
had become. 

The place one s in, though, doesn’t make any contribution 
to peace of mind: it s the spirit that makes everything agree- 
able to oneself. I ve seen for myself people sunk in gloom 
in cheerful and delightful country houses, and people in 
completely secluded surroundings who looked as if they 
were run off their feet. So there’s no reason why you should 
feel that you re not as much at rest in your mind as you 
might be just because you’re not here in Campania, ^^y 
aren t you, for that matter? Transmit your thoughts all the 
way here. There s nothing to stop you eiyoying the company 
of absent friends, as often as you like, too, and for as long as , 
you like. This pleasure in their company — and there’s no 
greater pleasure — is one we eryoy the more when were 
absent from one another. For having our friends present 
makes us spoilt; as a result of our talking and walking and 
sitting together every now and then, on being separated we 
haven t a thought for those we’ve just been seeing- One good 
reason, too, why we should endure the absence patiently h 
the fact that every one of m is absent to a great extent from 
his friends even when they are around. Count up in this 
connexion first the nights spent away from one another, then 
the different engagements that keep each one busy, then the 
time passed in the privacy of one’s study and in trips into the 
country, and you’ll see that periods abroad don’t deprive us 
of so very much. Possession of a friend should be with the 
spirit: the spirit’s never absent: it sees daily whoever it 

io8 



I.vi,2 LETTER LVI . . 

likes. So share with me my studies, my meals, my walb. 
Life would be restricted indeed if there were any barrier to 
our imaginations. L see you, my dear Lucilius, I hear you at 
diis very moment. I feel so very much with you that I wonder 
whether I shouldn’t start writing you notes rather than letters 1 


letter LVI 

I CANNOT for the life of me see that quiet is as necessary to a 
person who has shut himself away to do some studying as it is 
usually thought to be. Here am I with a babel of noise going 
on all about me. I have lodgings right over a public bam- 
house. Now imagine to yourself every kind of sound that 
can make one weary of one’s years. When the strenuom 
types are doing their exercises, swinging weight-laden han(^ 
about, I hear the grunting as they toil away - or go throug 
the motions of toiling away - at them, and the hissmgs an 
strident gasps every time they expel their pent breath. 
When my attention turns to a less active fellow who is con- 
tenting himself with an ordinary inej^ensive massage, I hear 
the smack of a hand pummelling his shoulders, the soun 
varying according as it comes down flat or cupped. But 
on top of this some ball player comes along and starts shout- 
ing out the score, that’s the endl Then add someone starting 
up a. brawl, and someone else caught thieving, and the man 
who likes the sound of his voice in the bath, and the people 
who leap into the pool with a tremendous splash. Apart horn 
those whose voices are, if nothing else, natural, think of the 
hair remover, continually giving vent to his shrill and pme- 
trating cry in order to advertise his presence, never silent 
unless it be while he is plucking someone s armpits and making 
the client yell for him! Then think of the various cries of the 

J-S.-6 JO9 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC ivi,2 

man selling drinks, and the one selling sausages and the other 
selling pastries, and aU the ones hawking for the catering shops, 
each publicizing his wares with a distinctive cry of his own. 

‘You must be made of iron,’ you may say, ‘or else hard of 
hearing if your mind is unaffected by all this babel 6f dis- 
cordant noises ardund you, when continual “good morning” 
greetings were enough to finish off the Stoic Chrysippusl’ 
But I swear I no more notice all this roar ,of noise than I do 
the sound of waves or falling water - even if I am here told 
th.e story of a people on the Nile who moved' their capital' 
solely because they could not stand the thimdering of a 
cataract! "Voices, I think, are more inclined to distract one 
than general noise; noise merely fills one’s ears, battering 
away at them while voices actually catch one’s attention. 
Among the things which create a racket all around me without 
distracting me at all I include the carriages hurrying by in the 
street, the carpenter who works in the same block, a man m 
the neighbourhood who saws, and this fellow tuning horns 
and flutes at the Trickling Fountain and emitting blasts m- 
stead of music, I still find an intermittent noise more irritating 
than a continuous one. But by now I have so steeled.myself 
against all these things that I can even put up with a coxswain s 
strident tones as he gives his oarsmen die rhythm. For I 
force my mind to become self-absorbed and not let outside 
things distract it. There can be absolute bedlam without so 
long as there is no commotion within, so long as fear and 
desire are not at loggerheads, so long as meanness and ex- 
travagance are not at odds and harassing each other. For what 
is the good of having silence throughout the neighbourhood 
if one’s emotions are in turmoil? 

The peaceful stillness of the night had lulled 

The world to rest.* 

* A fragment of Varro Atadnus’ translation from the Greek of 
Apdlloaius’ Argomutica. 


no 



LETTER LVI 


LVI,9 

Tliis is incorrect. There is no such thing as ‘peaceful stillness’ 
except where reason has lulled it to rest. Night does not 
remove our worries; it brings them to the surface. All it 
gives us is a change of anxieties. For even when people are 
asleep they have dreams as troubled as their days. The only 
true serenity is the one which represents the free development 
of a sound mind. Look at the man whose quest for sleep 
demands absolute quiet from his spacious house. To prevent 
any sound disturbing his ears every one of his host of' slaves 
preserves total silence and those who come anywhere near 
him walk on tip-toe. Naturally enough he tosses from side to 
side, 'trying to snatch some fitful sleep in between the spells 
of fretting, and complains of having heard soimds when he 
never heard them at all. And what do you suppose is the 
reason? His mind is in a ferment. It is this which needs to be 
set at peace. Here is the mutiny that needs to be suppressed. 
The fact that the body is lying down is no reason for suppos- 
ing that the min d is at peace. Rest is sometimes far frOm rest-' 
ful. Hence our need to be stimulated into general activity and 
kept occupied and busy with pursuits of the right nature 
whenever we are victims of the sort of idleness that wearies 
of itself. When great military commanders notice indiscipline 
among their men they suppress it by giving them some work 
to do , movmting expeditions to keep them actively employed. 
People who are really busy never have enough time to become 
skittish. And there is nothing so certain as the fact that the 
harmful consequences of inactivity are dissipated by activity. 

We commonly give the impression that the reasons for 
our having gone into political retirement are our disgust with 
public life and our dissatisfaction with some uncongenial and 
unrewarding post. Yet every now and then ambition rears 
Its head again in the retreat into which we were really driven 
by our apprehensions and our waning interest; for our 
^bition did not cease because it had been rooted out, but 


111 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC vn,9 

merely because it had. tired — or become piqued, perhaps, at 
its lack of success. I would say the same about extravagant 
living, which appears on occasion to have left one and then, 
when one has declared for the simple life, places temptation 
in the way. In the middle of one’s programme of fnigality it 
sets out after pleasures which one had discarded but not con- 
dcnmed, its pursuit of them indeed being all the more ardent 
the less one is aware of it. For when Aey are in the open 
vices invariably take a more moderate form; diseases too are 
on the way towards being cured when once they have broken 
out, instead of being latent, and made their presence felt. So 
it is with the love of money, the love of power and the other 
maladies that affect the minds of men - you may be sure that 
it is when they abate and give every appearance of being 
cured that they are at their most dangerous. We give the im- 
pression of being in retirement, and are nothing of the kind. 
For if we are genuine in this, if we have sounded the retreat 
and really turned away from the surface show, then, as I 
was saying a little while ago, nothing will distract us. Men 
and birds together in full chorus -wil] never break into our 
thinking when that thinking is good and has at last come to 
be of a sure and steady character. 

The temperament that starts at the soimd of a voice or 
chance noises in general is an unstable one and one that has 
yet to attain inward detachment. It has an element of uneasi- 
ness in it, and an element of the rooted fear that makes a 
man a prey to anxiety, as in the description given by our Virgil . 

And I, who formerly would never flinch 
At flying spears or serried ranks of Greeks, 

Am now alarmed by every breeze and roused 
By every sound to nervousness, in fear 
For this companion and this load alike.* 

* Aeneid, 11:726-9. Aeneas is describing his feelings as he leads Jus 
son and carries his father out of Troy while the city is being sacked. 


II2, 



LXITI, t 


LETTER LXIII 


The earlier cliaractcr here is the wise man, who knows no 
fear at tlic hurtling of missiles, or tlic clash of weapons against 
v.'capons in tlic close-packed ratiks, or die thunderous noise 
of a dty in destruction. The other, later one has cvcry'thing 
to learn; fearing for his belongings he pales at every noise; 
a single cxy, whatever it is, prostrates him, being immediately 
taken for the yelling of die enemy; die slightest movement 
frightens him out of his life; his baggage makes him a coward, 
Pick out any one of your ‘successful’ men, with all dicy 
trail or carry about widi them, and you will have a picture of 
the man ‘in fear for diis companion and diis load’. You may 
be sure, then, diat you are at last ‘lulled to rest’ when noise 
never reaches you and when voices never shake you out of 
yourself, whcdicr diey be menacing or inviting or just a 
meaningless hubbub of empty sound all round you. 

‘This is all very well,* you may say, ‘but isn’t it sometimes 
a lot simpler just to keep away from die din?’ I concede that, 
and in fact it is the reason why I shall shortly be moving 
elsewhere. What I wanted was to give myself a test and some 
practice. Why should I need to suffer die torture any longer 
than I want to when Ulysses found so easy a remedy for his 
companions even against the Sirens?* 


LETTER LXIII 

I AM very sorry to hear of your friend Flaccus’ death. Still, 
I would not have you grieve imduly over it. I can scarcely 
venture to demand that you should not grieve at all - and yet 
I am convinced that it is better that way. But who will ever 

* Homer narrates in BookXII of the Odyssey how the hero, following 
the advice of Circe, stopped the cars of his crew with beeswax while 
they rowed past the place where the temptresses sang. 

1X3 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC IXin,I 

be granted that strength of character, unless he he a man 
already lifted far out of fortune’s reach? Even he will feel a 
twinge of pain when a thing like this happens - but only a 
twinge. As for us, we can be pardoned for having given way, 
to tears so long as they have not run down in excessive 
quantities and we have checked them for ourselves. When 
one has lost a friend one’s eyes should be neither dry nor 
streaming. Tears, yes, there should be, but not lamentation. 
Can you find the rtile I am laying down a harsh one when the 
greatest of Greek poets has restricted to a single day, no more, 
a person’s right to cry - in the passage where he tells us that 
even Niobe remembered to eat?* Would you like to know 
what lies behind extravagant weeping and wailing? In our 
tears we are trying to find means of proving that we feel the 
loss. We are not being governed by our grief but parading it. 
No one ever goes into mourning for the benefit merely, of 
himself Oh, the miserable folly of it all - that there should be 
an element of ostentation in grief! 

‘Come now,’ you will be asking, ‘are you saying that I 
should forget a person who has been a friend?’ Well, you 
are not proposing to keep him very long in your memory it 
his memory is to last just as long as your grief. At any moment 
something or other will happen that will tom that long face 
of yours into a smiling one. I do not see very much time going 
by before the sense of loss is mitigated and even the keenest 
sorrowings settle down. Your face will cease to be its present 
picture of sadness as soon as you take your eyes off yourse 
At the moment you are keeping a watch on your grief-h^^ 
even as you do it is fading away, and the keener it is the quicker 
it is in stopping. 

Let us see to it that the recollection of those we have lost 
becomes a pleasure to us. Nobody really cares to c^t s 
mind back to something which-he is never going to think o 
* Homer, Iliad, XIX:228f„ XXIV:6oif. 



txm, 10 


LETTER LXIII 


without pain. Inevitable as it is that the names of persons who 
were dear to us and are now lost should cause us a gnawing 
sort of pain when we think of them, that pain is not without 
a pleasure of its own. As my teacher Attains used to say, ‘In 
the pleasure we find in the memory of departed friends tliere 
is a resemblance to the way in which certain bitter fruits are 
agreeable or the very acidity of an exceedingly old wine has 
its attraction. But after a certain interval all that pained us is 
obhterated and the enjoyment comes to us unalloyed.’ If we 
are to believe him, ‘Thinking of friends who are ahve and 
Well is like feasting on cakes and honey. Recalling those who 
are gone is pleasant but not without a touch of sourness. Who 
would deny, though, that even acid things like this with a 
harshness in their taste do stimulate the p^ate?’ Personally I 
do not agree with him there. Thinking of departed fnends is 
to me something sweet and mellow. For when I had them 
with me it was with the feeling that I was going to lose them, 
and now that I have lost them I keep the feeling that I have 
them with me still. 

So, my dear Lucilius, behave in keeping with your usual 
fair-mindedness and stop misinterpreting the kindness of 
fortune. She has given as well as taken away. Let us therefore 
go all out to make the most of friends, since no one can tell 
how long we shall have the opportunity. Let us just think 
how often we leave them behind when we are setting out on 
some long journey or other, or how often we fail to see diem 
when we are staying in the same area, and we sliall realize 
diat we have lost all too much time while they are still alive. 
Can you stand people who treat their friends Avith complete 
neglect and dien mourn them to distraction, never caring 
about anyone luiless they have lost him? And the reason they 
lament them so extravagantly dicn is that they are afraid 
people may wonder whedicr they did care; diey are looking 
for belated means of demonstrating their devotion. If we have 

115 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 

Other friends, we arc hardiy kind or appreciative of them f 
they count for so very little when it comes to consoling ^ 
for the one we have buried. If we have no other friends, sve 
have done ourselves a greater injury than fortune has done us: 
she has deprived us of a single friend but we have deprived 
ourselves of every friend we have failed to make. A person, 
moreover, who has not been able to care about more than 
one friend cannot have cared even about that one too much. 
Supposing someone lost his one and only shirt in a robbery, 
would you not think him an utter idiot if he chose to bewail 
his loss rather than look about him for some means of keep- 
ing out the cold and find something to put over his shoulders? 
You have buried someone you loved. Now look for someone 
to love. It is better to make, good the loss of a friend than to 
cry over him. 

What I am about to go on to say is, I know, a common- 
place, but I am not going to omit it merely because every one 
has said it. Even a person who has not deliberately put au 
end to his grief finds an end to it in the passing of time. An 
merely growing weary of sorrowing is quite shameful as a 
means of curing sorrow in the case of an enlightened man- 
should prefer to see you abandoning grief than it abandonmS; 
you. Much as you may wish to, you will not be able to keep it 
up for very long, so give it up as early as possible. For women 
our forefathers fixed the period of mourning at a year witu 
the intention, not that women should continue mourning ^ 
long as that, but that they should not go on any longer: for 
men no period is prescribed at ail because none would he 
decent. Yet out of all the pathetic females you know of who 
were only dragged away from the graveside, or even tom 
from the body itself, with the greatest of difficulty, can yon 
show me one whose tears lasted for a whole month? Nothing 
makes itself unpopular quite so quickly as a person's grief. 
When it is fresh it attracts people to its side, finds someone to 

Ii6 



LETTER LXIII 


ixm, i6 

offer it consolation; but if it is perpetuated it becomes an 
object of ridicule - deservedly, too, for it is either feigned or 
foolish. 

And all this comes to you from me, the very man who wept 
for Annaeus Serenus, that dearest of friends to me, so im- 
restrainedly that I must needs be included - though this is 
the last thing I should want — among examples of men who 
have been defeated by grief! Nevertheless I condemn today 
the way I behaved then. I realize now that my sorrowing in 
the way I did was mainl y due to the fact that I had never 
considered the possibility of his dying before me. That he 
was younger than I was, a good deal yoimger too, was all 
that ever occurred to me — as if fate paid any regard to 
seniority 1 So let us bear it constantly in mind that those we 
are. fond of are just as Hable to death as we are ourselves. 
What I should have said before was, ‘My friend Serenus is 
younger than I am, but what difference does that make? He 
should die later than me, but it is quite possible he will die 
before me.’ It was just because I did not do so that fortiuie 
caught me unprepared with that sudden blow. Now I bear 
it ui mind not only that all things are hable to death but that 
that Hability is governed by no set rules. Whatever can happen 
at any time can happen today. Let us reflect then, my dearest 
Lucilius, that we ourselves shall not be long in reaching the 
place we mourn his having reached. Perhaps, too, if only 
there is truth in the story told by sages and some welcoming 
abode awaits us, he whom we suppose to be dead and gone 
has merely been sent on ahead. 


117 



LETTER LXV 


txv,i 


I SHARED yesterday with a bout of illness. It claimed the 
morning but it let me have the afternoon. So I started off by 
doing some reading to see what energy I had. Then, as it 
proved up to this, I ventured to make further demands on 
it — or perhaps I should say concessions to it - and did some 
writing, I was at this with more than my customary concen- 
tration, too, what with the dilEculty of the subject and my 
refusal to give in, until some friends of mine put a stop to it, 
applying force to restrain me as if I were an invalid who was 
recklessly overdoing things. The pen gave place to talk, 
which included the following matter of dispute that I shall 
now state to you. We have appointed you as arbitrator - 
and you have more of a case on your hands than you think, 
for the contest is a three-cornered one. 

Om Stoic philosophers, as you know, maintain that there 
are two elements in the universe from which all things are 
derived, namely cause and matter. Matter hes inert and 
inactive, a substance with unlimited potential, but destined 
to remain idle if no one sets it in motion; and it is cause (this 
meaning the same as reason) which turns matter to whatever 
end it wishes and fashions it into a variety of different products. 
There must, then, be something out of which things come 
into being and something else by means of which things 
come into being; the first is matter and the second is cause. 
Now all art is an imitation of nature. So apply what I 
saying about the universe to man’s handiwork. Take a 
it had the matter to be worked on by the sculptor and it aa 
the sculptor to give configuration to the matter - bronze, m 
other words, in the case of the statue, being the matter ^ 
the craftsman the cause. It is the same with ail things: they 

Ii8 



LETTER LXV 


ixv,7 

consist of sometliirig which comes into being and something 
else whicli brings them into being. 

Stoics believe that there is only one cause - that which 
brings things into being. Aristotle thinks tliat the term ‘cause’ 
can be used in three different ways. ‘The first cause,’ he 
says, ‘is matter - without it nothing can be brought into 
existence. The second is the craftsman, and the third is form, 
which is impressed on every single piece of work as on a 
statue.’ This last is what Aristotle calls the idos. ‘And,’ he says, 
there is a fourth as well, the purpose of the whole work.’ 
bet me explain what this means. The ‘first cause’ of the 
statue is the broreze, as it would never have been made unless 
there had been something out of which it could be cast or 
tiioulded. The ‘second cause’ is the sculptor, as the bronze 
could not have been shaped into the state in which it is with- 
out those skilled hands having come to it. The ‘third cause’ 
ts the form, as our statue could not have been called ‘Tlae 
Man with the Spear’ or ‘The Boy tying up his Hair’* had 
diis not been the guise impressed on it. The ‘fomth cause’ is 
the end in view in its making, for had this not existed the 
statue would never have been made at all. What is this end? 
It is what attracted the sculptor, what his goal was in creating 
It; It may have been money, if when he worked it he was 
gouig to sell it, or fame, if the aim of his endeavours was to 
Win a name, or religion, if it was a work for presentation to a 
temple. This too, then, is a cause of the statue’s coining into 
being - unless you take the view that things in the absence of 
which the statue would never have been created should not be 
included among the causes of the particular creation. 

To these fovur causes Plato adds a fifth in the model - what 
«c himself calls the idea - this being what the sculptor had 
constantly before his eyes as he executed the intended' work. 

Well-known works of Polycletus, the great fifth century Greek 
sculptor. Copies of both statues have survived. 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC rxv,7 

It does not matter whether he has his model without, one to 
which he can direct his eyes, or within, conceived and set up 
hy the artist inside his own head, God has within himself 
models like this of everything in the universe, his mind 
embracing the designs and calculations for his projects; he is 
full of these images which Plato calls ideas, etemaJ, immutable, 
ever dynamic- So though human beings may perish, humanity 
in itself- the pattern on which every human being is moulded 
— lasts on, and while human beings go through much and 
pass away itself remains quite unaffected. As Plato has it, 
then, there are five causes: the material, the agent, the form, 
the model and the end; and finally we get the result of^ 
these. In the case of the statue, to use the cxarriple we began 
with, the material is the bronze, the agent is the sculptor, the 
form is the guise it is given, the model is what the sculptor 
making it copies, the end is what the rnaker has in view, and 
the final result is the statue itself. The universe as well, 
according to Plato, has all these elements. The maker is God; 
matter is the material ; the form is the general character and 
lay-out of the universe as we see it; the model naturally 
enough is the pattern which God adopted for the creation of 
this stupendous work in all its beauty; the end is what God 
had in view when he created it, and that - in case you are 
asking what is the end God has in view - is goodness. That at 
any rate is what Plato says: ‘What was the cause of Gods 
creating the universe? He is good, and whoever is good can 
never be grudging with anything good; so he made it as 
good a world as it was in his power to make it. 

Now it is for you as judge to pronounce your verdict 
and declare whose statement in your opinion seems to be - 
not the truest (for that here is as far out of bur reach as Tru 
herself) - but most like the truth. 

This assortment of causes which Aristotle and Plato have 
collected together embraces either too much or too little, or 


120 



LXV.IS LETTER LXV 

if they take the view diat everything in the absence of which a 
thing cannot be brought into being is a cause of its creation, 
they have failed to name enough. They should be including 
time in their list of causes - nothing can come into being 
without time. They should be including place - a thing will 
^certainly not come into being if there is nowhere for this to 
happen. They should be including motion — without this 
nothing either comes into existence or goes out of existence; 
vdthout motion there is no such thing as art and no such thing 
as change. What we are looking for at the moment is a 
primary and general cause. And this must be something 
elementary, since matter too is elementary. If we ask what 
cause is, surely the answer is creative reason, that is to say 
God. All those things which you have listed are not an array 
of individual causes, but dependent on a single one, the cause 
that actually creates. You may say form is a catise, but form is 
something which the artist imposes on his work - a part of 
die cause, yes, but not a cause. The model, too, is an indis- 
pensable instrument of the cause, but not a cause. To the 
sculptor his model is as indispensable as his chisel or his file: 
his art can get nowhere without them, but this does not make 
diem parts or causes of the art. *The end the artist has in view, 
our friend says, ‘the thing which induces him to set about a 
Work of creation, is a cause.’ Even if we grant that it is, it is 
only an accessory cause, not the effective cause. Accessory 
causes are infinite in number; what we are after is the general 
cause. In any event that assertion on the part of Plato and 
Aristotle that the universe in its entirety, the whole, completed 
Work of creation, is a cause is not in keeping with their usual 
acuteness as thinkers. There is a very great difference between 
a creation and its cause. 

Now you must either pronounce your verdict or — the 
easier course in matters of this nature — declare your inability 
to arrive at one and order a rehearing. ‘What pleasure, you 


I2I 



ixv, IS 


letters from a stoic 

you get out of flittering time away discussing 
those quesnons? It's not as if you could say they rid youTf 

aZ f ^y desire/ Well, in raising and 

^gumg these less deserving topics my own attitude is that 
ey serve to cairn the spirit, and that whilst I examine my- 
se irst, certainly, I examine the universe arotmd me after- 
wards. I am not even wasting time, as you suppose, at the 
moment, or those questions, provided they are not sulyected 
to a rmneing or^ dissection with the useless kind of over- 
su t ety we have just seen as the result, all elevate and lighten 
die spmt the soul which yearns to win free of the heavy load 
It IS sa ed with here and return to the world where it once 
e onged. For to it this body of ours is a burden and a tor- 
ment. -^d harassed by the body’s overwhelming weight, 

^ captivity unless philosophy comes to its rescue, 

1 di^ it breathe more freely in the contemplation of nature, 
releasing it from earthly into heavenly surroundings. This to 
the soul means freedom, the ability to wander far and free; 

It steals away for a while from the prison in which it is 
confined and has its strength renewed in the world above, 
y^en craftsmen ei^aged on some intricate piece of work 
which imposes a tiring strain on the eyes have to work by an 
inadequate and undependable light, they go out into the 
open air and treat their eyes to the free sunshine in some open 
space or other dedicated to public recreation. In the same way 
the soul, shut away in this dim and dismal dwelling, as often 
as it can makes for the open and finds its relaxation in contem- 
plating the natural umverse. The wise man and devotee of 
philosophy is needless to say inseparable from his body, and 
yet he is detached from it so far as the best part of his person- 
ality is concerned, directing his thoughts towards things 
above. He looks on this present life of his, much like the man 
who has signed on as a soldier, as the term he has to serve 
out. And he is so made that he neither loves life nor hates it 


JZZ 



IXV, 22 


LETTER LXV 


He endures the lot of mortality even though he knows there 
is a finer one in store for him. 

Are you telling me not to investigate the natural world? 
Are you trying to bar me from the whole of it and restrict 
me to a part of it? Am I not to inquire how everything in 
the universe began, who gave things form, who separated 
them out when they were all plunged together in a single 
great conglomeration of inert matter? Am I not to inquire 
mto the identity of the artist who created that universe? Or 
the process by which this huge mass became subject to law and 
order? Or the nature of the one who collected the things that 
were scattered apart, sorted apart the things that were com- 
mingled, and when all things lay in formless chaos allotted 
them their individual shapes? Or the soiurce of the light (is it 
fire or is it something brighter?) that is shed on us in such 
abundance? Am I supposed not to inquire into this sort of 
thing? Am I not to know where I am descended from, 
■whether I am to see this world only once or be bom into it 
again time after time, what my destination is to be after my 
stay here, what abode will await my soul on its release from 
the terms of its serfdom on earth? Are you forbidding me to 
associate with heaven, in other words ordering me to go 
through hfe with my eyes bent on the groimd? I am too great, 
was bom to too great a destiny to be my body’s slave. So far 
as I am concerned that body is nothing more or less than a 
fetter on my freedom. I place it squarely in the path of 
fortune, letting her expend her onslaught on it, not allowing 
any blow to get through it to my actual self. For that body is 
^all that is vulnerable about me; within this dwelling so Hable 
to mjury there hves a spirit that is free. Never shall that flesh 
compel me to feel fear, never shall it drive me to any pretence 
tmworthy of a good man; never shall I tell a he out of con- 
sideration for this petty body. I shah dissolve our partnership 
when this seems the proper course, and even now while we 

123 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC txv,22 

are bound one to the other the partnership will not be on 
equal terms: the soul will assume undivided authority. 
Refusal to be influenced by one’s body assures one’s freedom. 

And to this freedom (to get back to the subject) even the 
kind of inquiries we were talking about just now have a 
considerable contribution to make. We know that every- 
thing in the umverse is composed of matter and of God. God, 
encompassed within them, controls them all, they following 
his leadership and guidance. Greater power and greater value 
reside in that which creates (in this case God) than in the 
matter on which God works. W^ell, the place which in this 
universe is occupied by God is in man the place of the spirit. 
What matter is in the universe the body is in us. Let the worse, 
then, serve the better. Let us meet with bravery whatever may 
befall us. Let us never feel a shudder at the thought of being 
wotmdcd or of being made a prisoner, or of poverty or 
persecution. What is death? Either a transition or an end. I am 
not afiraid of coming to an end, this being the same as never 
having begun, nor of transition, for I shall never be in con- 
finement quite so cramped anywhere else as I am here. 


LETTER LXXVII 

Today we saw some boats from Alexandria - the, ones they 
call ‘ the mail packets ’ — come into view all of a sudden. They 
were the ones which are normally sent ahead to announce the 
coming of the fleet that will arrive behind them. The sight of 
them is always a welcome one to the Campanians. The whole 
of Puteoli crowded onto the wharves, all picking out the 
Alexandrian vessels from an immense crowd of other ship- 
ping by the actual trim of their sails, these boats being the 
only vessels allowed to keep their , topsails spread. Out at sea 


124. 



txxvn,4 LETTER LXXVII 

all ships carry these sails, for nothing makes quite the same 
contribution to speed as the upper canvas, the area from which 
a boat derives the greatest part of its propulsion. That is why 
whenever the wind stiffens and becomes xmduly strong sail is 
shortened, the wind having less force lower down. On enter- 
ing the channel between Capri and the headland from which 

Upon the storm-swept summit Pallas keeps 

Her high lookout,* 

regulations require all other vessels to confine themselves to 
carrying a mainsail, and the topsail is accordingly conspicuous 
on the Alexandrian boats. 

While everyone around me was hurrying thus from all 
directions to the waterfront, I foxmd a great deal of pleasure 
in refusing to bestir myself. Although there would be letters 
for me from my people over there I was in no hurry to know 
what reports they might be carrying or what might be the 
state of my financial interests there. For a long time now I 
have not been concerned about any profit or loss. This 
partioilar pleasure was one that I ought to have been experienc- 
ing even if I were not an old man; but being old hx fact made 
it all the greater, for it meant that however little money I 
might have I should still have more left to cover the journey 
than distance left to be covered — especially as the journey on 
which we have all set out is one which does not have to be 
travelled to the very end. An ordinary journey will be in- 
complete if you come to a stop in the middle of it, or any- 
where short of your destination, but life is never incomplete 
if it is an honourable oiie. At whatever point you leave life, 
if you leave it in the right way, it is a whole. And there are 
many occasions on which a man should leave life not only 
bravely but for reasons which are not as pressing as they might 
be — the reasons which restrain us being not so pressing either. 

* The source of this quotation is not known. 

125 



letters from a stoic IXXW,5 

ol knew very well, a man, 

bevan fr tranquillity early in life, 

disease h^U suicide after be had gone down with a 
which was not an incurable one but at the same time 

j *'^°“kIesome one, importunate in its 
and together a large number of bis fiends, 

Tiro-' advice. This consisted either of 

roT ^kem} that he should just 

, ^ ^ ^ course he himself felt urged to take, or of 
whatever coumel flattering admirers thought would be most 
iRely to gratify someone meditating suicide, until a Stoic 
mend of mme an outstanding personality for whom I can 
tind tio more fitting compliment than that of calling him a 
man o g tmg courage, gave what I thought was the most 
inspiring adwce. This was how he began: ‘My dear Marcel- 
mus, e said, you mustn t let this worry you as if you were 
havmg to make a great decision. There’s nothing so very 
^eat a out iving - all your slaves and all the animals do it. 
t IS, owever, a great thing is to die in a mann er which is 
onoura ^ e, enlightened and courageous. Think how long 
now you ve been doing the same as them - food, sleep, sex, 
the never-endmg cycle. The desire for death can be experi- 
enced not merely by the enlightened or the brave or the un- 
PPY’ but even by the squeamish.’ Well, Marcellinus 
wante iw urging, only a helper. His slaves refused to obey 
him m ^s, whereupon our Stoic talked away their fears, 
iettmg them know that the household staff could only be in 
danger if there had been any room for doubt as to whether 
t em master s death had been a voluntary one; besides, he 
to em, it Was just as bad to let other people see you order- 
ing y our master not to kill himself as actually to kill him. He 
thm s^gested to Marcellinus himself that it would not be an 
tmkmd gesture if, in the same way as at the end of a dinner 
the leftovers are divided among the attendants, something 

126 1 



ixxvn, 12 LETTER LXXVII 

were offered at the end of his life to those who had served 
throughout it. Marcellinus had a generous and good-natured 
disposition which was no less evident where it meant personal 
expense, and he distributed accordingly little sums of money 
among his slaves, who were now in tears, and went out of his 
way to comfort them all. He did not need to resort to a 
weapon or to shedding blood. After going without food for 
three days he had a steam tent put up, in his own bedroom, a 
bath was brought in, in which he lay for a long time, and as 
fresh supplies of hot water were continually poured in he 
passed almost imperceptibly away, not without, as he com- 
mented more than once, a kind’ of pleasurable sensation, 
one that is apt to be produced by the gentle fading out o 
which those of us who have ever fainted will have some 
experience. 

I have digressed, but you will not have minded hearing 
this story, since you will gather from it that your friend s 
departure was not a difficult or unhappy one. Although his 
death was self-inflicted, the manner of his passing was 
supremely relaxed, a mere gliding out of life. Yet the stoty 
is not without its practical value for the future. For frequently 
enough necessity demands just such examples. The times are 
frequent enough when we cannot reconcile ourselves to dying, 
or to knowing that we ought to die. 

No one is so ignorant as not to know that some day e 
luust die. Nevertheless when death draws near he ttims, 
wailing and trembling, looking for a way out. Wouldn t you 
think a man a prize fool if he burst into tears because he 
didn’t live a thousand years ago? A man is as much a fool for 
shedding tears because he isn’t going to be alive a thousand 
years from now. There’s no difference between the one and 
the other — you didn’t exist and you won t exist — you ve no 
concern with either period. This is the moment you ve been 
pitched into — supposing you were to make it longer how 

127 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC ixxvn, 12 

long would you make it? Wliat’s the point of tears? What’s 
the point of prayers? You’re only wasting your hreath. 

So give up hoping that your prayers can bring 
Some change in the dedsions of the gods * 

Those decisions are fixed and permanent, part of the mighty 
and eternal train of destiny. You will go the way that aU 
tilings go. What is strange about that? This is the law to 
which you were bom; it was the lot of your father, your 
mother, your ancestors and of all who came before you as it 
will be of all v/ho come after you. There is no means ofalter- 
ing the irresistible succession of events which carries all 
things along in its binding grip. Think of the multitudes of 
people doomed to die that will be following you, that will be 
keeping you company ! I imagine you’d be braver about it il^ 
thousands upon thousands were dying with you: the fact is 
that men as well as other creatures are breathing their last in 
one way or another in just such numbers at the very instant 
when you’re unable to make your mind up about death. You 
weren’t thinking, surely, that you wouldn’t yourself one day 
arrive at the destination towards which you’ve been heading 
from the beginning? Every journey has its end. 

Here I imagine you’ll be expecting me to tell you the 
stories of examples set by heroic men? Well, I’ll tcU you about 
ones which children have set. History relates the story of the 
famous Spartan, a mere boy who, when he was taken prisoner, 
kept shouting in his native Doric, T shall not be a slave!’ He 
was as good as his word. The first time he was ordered to 
perform a slave’s task, some humiliating household job (his 
actual orders were to fetch a disgusting chamber pot), he 
dashed his head against a wall and cracked his skull open. 
Freedom is as near as that - is anyone really still a slave.'' 
Would you not rather your own son died like that than lived 

* Virgil, Aeneid, VI: 376. 

128 



Ixxvn.lS LETTER LXXVIL 

by reason, of spinelessness to an advanced age? Why be 
perturbed, then, about death when even a child can meet it 
bravely? Suppose you refuse to follow liim: you will just be 
dragged after him. Assume the authority wliich at present 
lies with others. Siurcly you can adopt the spirited attitude of 
that boy and say, ‘No slave am I!’ At present, you unliappy 
creature, slave you are, slave to your fellow-men, slave to 
circumstance and slave to life (for life itself is slavery if the 
courage to die be absent). 

Have you anything that might induce you to wait? You 
have exhausted the very pleasures that make you hesitate and 
hold you back; not one of them has any novelty for you, not 
one of them now fails to bore you out of sheer excess. You 
know what wine or honey-wine tastes like: it makes no 
difference whether a hundred ora thousand flagons go through 
your bladder — all you are is a strainer. You are perfectly 
familiar with the taste of oysters or mullet. Your luxurious 
way of life has kept back not a single fresh experience for 
you to try in coming years. And yet these are the things from 
which you are reluctant to be tom away. Wliat else is there 
which you would be sorry to be deprived of? Friends? Do 
you know how to be a friend? Your country? Do you really 
value her so highly that you would put off your dmner for 
her? The sunlight? If you could you would put out that light— 
for what have you ever done that deserved a place in it? 
Confess it — it is no attachment to the world of poHtics or 
business, or even the world of nature, that makes you put off 
dying — the delicatessens, in which there is nothing you have 
left untried, are what you are reluctant to leave. You are 
scared of death — but how magnificently heedless of it you are 
while you are dealing with a dish of choice mushrooms ! You 
Want to live — but do you know how to live? You are scared 
of dying - and, .tell me, is the kind of life you lead really any 
different from being dead? Caligula was once passing a 


LETTERS FROM , A STOIC ixxvn, l8 

column of captives on the Latin Road when one of them, 
with a hoary old beard reaching down his breast, begged to be 
put to death. ‘So,’ replied Caligula, ‘you are alive, then, as 
you are?’ That is the answer to give to people to whom death 
would actually come as a release. ‘You are scared of dying? 
So you are alive, then, as you are? ’ 

Someone, though, will say, ‘But I want to live because of 
all the worthy activities I’m engaged in. I’m performing life’s 
duties conscientiously and energetically and I’m reluctant to 
leave them undone.’ Come now, surely you know that dying 
is also one of life’s duties? You’re leaving no duty tmdone, 
for there’s no fixed number of duties laid down which you re 
supposed to complete. Every life without exception is a 
short one. Looked at in relation to the universe even the lives 
of Nestor and Sattia were short. In Sattia, who ordered that 
her epitaph should record that she had lived to the age of 
ninety-nine, you have an example of someone actually boast- 
ii^ of a prolonged old age — had it so happened that she had 
lasted out the hundredth year everybody, surely, would have 
found her quite insufferable ! As it is with a play, so it is with 
life — what matters is not how long the acting lasts, but how . 
good it is. It is not important at what point you stop. Stop 
wherever you will — only make sure that you round it ott 
with a good ending. 


LETTER LXXVIII 

I AM all the more sorry to hear of the trouble you are having 
with constant catarrh; and the spells of feverishness whicli go 
with it when it becomes protracted to the point of being 
chronic, because this kind of ill health is something I have 
experienced myself. In its early stages I refused to kt 

130 



Lxxvin, 4 LETTER LXXVIII 

bother me, being still young enough then to adopt a defiant 
attitude to sickness and put up with hardships, but eventually 
I succumbed to it altogether. Reduced to a state of complete 
emaciation, I had arrived at a point where the catarrhal dis- 
charges were virtually carrying me away with tliem 
gether. On many an occasion I felt an urge to cut my life 
short there and then, and was only held back by the thought 
of my father, who had been the Hndest of fathers to me and 
was then in his old ^e. Having in mind not how bravely I 
was capable of dying but how far from bravely he was 
capable of bearing the loss, I commanded myself to Hve. There 
are times when even to Hve is an act of bravery. 

bet me tell you the things that provided me wi^ con- 
solation in those days, telling you to begin with that the 
thoughts which brought me this peace of mind had ^ 
effect of medical treatment. Comforting thoughts (provide^ 
they are not of a discreditable kind) contribute to a person s 
cure;. anything which raises his spirits benefits him physicaUy 
as well. It was my Stoic studies that really saved me. For the 
fact that I was able to leave my bed and was restored to 
health I give the credit to philosophy. I owe her - and it is 
the least of my obligations to her - my life. But my ^kn 
also made a considerable contribution to my return to e . 
I foimd a great deal of relief in their cheering remarks, in t e 
hours they spent at my bedside and in their conversation 
with me. There is nothing, my good Lucilius, g^ke V 'e e 
devotion of one’s fiiends for supporting one ^in illness 
tutoring one to health, or for dispelling one’s mticipation 
and dread of death. I even came to feel that I could not re y 
die when these were tlie people I would leave surviving me, 
or perhaps I should say I came to think I would continue to 
live because of them, if not among them; for it seemed to 
me that in death I would not be passing away but passing on 
my spirit to them. These things gave me the willingness to 

131 



LETTERS FjROM A STOIC 


ixxm,4 


help my own recovery and to endure all the pain. It is quite 
pathetic, after all, if one has put the will to die behind one, to 
he without the will to live. 

There, then, are your remedies. The doctor will be telling 
you how much walking you should do, how much exercise 
you should take; he will be telling you not to overdo the 
inactivity - as is the tendency with invalids - and recommend- 
ing reading aloud to exercise the breathing (its passages and 
reservoir being the areas affected); he will reconunend that 
you take a trip by sea and derive some stimulation for the 
internal organs from the gentle motion of the boat; he will 
prescribe a diet for you, and tell you when to make use of 
wine as a restorative and when to give it up in case it starts 
you coughing or aggravates your cough. My own advice to 
you - and not only in the present illness but in your whole 
life as well - is this: refuse to let the thought of death bother 
you: nothing is grim when we have escaped that fear. There 
are three upsetting things about any illness: the fear of dying) 
the physical suffering and the interruption of our pleasures. I 
have said enough about the first, but will just say this, that 
the fear is due to the facts of nature, not of illness. Illness has 
actually given many people a new lease of life; the expenen^ 
of being near to death has been their preservation. You win 
die not because you are sick but because you are alive. That 
end still awaits you when you have been cured. In getting weu 
again you may be escsq)ing some ill health but not death. No^ 
let us go back and deal with the disadvantage which veaXy 
does belong to illness, the &ct that it involves considerafa e 
physical torments. These are made bearable by their luter- 
mittency. For when pain is at its most severe the very intensity 
finds means of ending it. Nobody can be in acute pain and fee 
it for long. Nature in her unlimited kindness to us has so 
arranged things as to make pain either bearable or brief T c 
severest pains have their seat in the most attenuated parts o 

132 



letter LXXVIll 

the body; any area of slight dimensions like a tendon or a 
joint causes excruciating agony when trouble arises within 
Its small confines. But these parts of our anatomy go numb 
ver)’ quickly, the pain itself gi'ing rise to a loss of all sensation 
of pain {either because the life force is impaired by being held 
tip in its natural circulation and so loses its active power, die 
power W’hich enables it to give us warning of pain, or be- 
cause the diseased secretions, no longer able to drain away, 
become self-obliterated and deprive the areas they have 
congested of sensation). Thus gout in the feet or the hands or 
^y pain in the vertebrae or tendons has intermittent lulls 
■when it has dulled the area it is torturing; these arc all cases 
Ri which die distress is caused by die initial twinges and the 
violence of the pain disappears as rime goes on, die suffering 
ending in a state of insensibility. The reason why pain in an 
eye, an ear or a tooth is exceptionally severe is the fact diat it 
develops in a limited area, and indeed this applies just as 
much to pains in the head; nevertheless if its intensity goes 
beyond a certain point it is turned into a state of dazed 
stupefaction. So there is the comforting tiling about extremities 

of pain; if you feel it too much you are bound to stop feeling 
it. 

^^at in fact makes people who are morally xmenlightened 
upset by the experience of physical distress is their failure to 
acquire the habit of contentment with the spirit. They have 
uistead been preoccupied by. the body. That is why a man of 
Uoble and enlightened character separates body from spirit 
®ud has just as much to do with the former, the frail and 
complaining part of our nature, as is necessary and no more, 
^d a lot to do with the better, the divine element. ‘But it’s 
^rd having to do without pleasures we’re used to,- having to 
^ve up food and go thirsty as well as hungry.’ Tiresome it is 
m the first stages of abstinence. Later, as the organs of appetite 
uecline in strength with exhaustion, the cravings die down; 


133 



LBTTERS FROM A STOIC rxxvni,ii 
1 awav Ihr 

without thin f harsh about having to do 

W^ut dungs for witch you have ceased to We aay 

lea^fSt^off — “ off^ogeAer, or at 

'° '“=• Moreover one 
itw frt^ ‘•rags ra forestall it 

with ti k' ’ f‘^‘^ every pain (or at l^t every pain 

„f ;„ ‘’•^rag“'“ raourrence) gives one advance warning 

coming illness the suiFen'ng is always bearable so 
long as you refuse to be affected by the ultimate threat. . 

o not go out of your way to make your troubles 
^y more tiresome than they are and burden yourself with 

am ^U'^' thinking has not been adding 

y ng to It, pain is a trivial sort of thing. If by contrast 
you start giving yourself encouragement, saying to yourself 
S ~ ot nothing much, anyway - Jet’s sack it out 
presently , then in thinking it a trivial matter 
you will be ensuring that it actuaUy is. Everything hangs on 
ones t ng. The love of power or money or luxurious 
are not the only things which are guided by popular 
from people’s thinking even in the 

way we feel pain. 

A mm is as unhappy as he has convinced himself he is. And 
complaining away about one’s sufferings after they are over 
(you know the kind of language; ‘No one had ever been in 
such a bad state. The torments and hardships I endured.' No 
one thought I would recover. The number of times I was 

CriVCn. UD for In^f h\r thr^ f _ 1 /• - r 


® xne number or times i was 

given up for lost by the family ! Tlie number of times I was 
despaned of by the doctors ! A man on the rack isn't tom with 
pain the way I was’) is something I think should be banned. 


j on me racK isn 

pain the way I was’) is something I think should be banned. 
Even if all this is true, it is past history. What’s the good of 
raggmg up sufferings which are over, of being unhappy now 


134 



Ljocvra, i6 LETTER LXXVIII 

just because you were then? What is more, doesn t everyone 
add a good deal to his tale of Iiardships and deceive himself as 
well in the matter? Besides, tliere is a pleasure in having suc- 
ceeded in enduring something the actual enduring of which 
was very far from pleasant; when some trouble or other 
comes to an end the natural thing is to be glad. There are 
two things, then, the recollecting of trouble in the past as 
well as the fear of troubles to come, that I have to root- out: 
the first is no longer of any concern to me and the second has 
yet to be so. And when a man is in the grip of difficulties he 
should say 

There may be pleasure in tlie memory 

Of even these events one day.* 

He should put his whole heart into the fight against them. If 
he gives way before them he will lose the battle; if he exerts 
himself against them he will win. What in fact most people do 
is pull down on their own heads what they should be holding 
tip against; when sometliing is in imminent danger of falling 
on you, the pressure of it bearing heavily on you, it will only 
move after you and become an even ^eater weight to sup- 
port if you back away from it; if instead you stand your 
ground, willing yourself to resist, it will be forced back. 
Look at the amount of punishment that boxers and wrestlers 
take to the face and the body generally ! They wiU put up 
none the less with any suffering in their desire for fame, and 
will undergo it all not merely in the course of fighting but 
in preparing for their fight's as well: their training in itself 
constitutes suffering. Let us too overcome all things, with 
our reward consisting not in any wreath or garland, not in 
trumpet-calls for silence for the ceremonial proclamation of 
our name, but in moral worth, in strength of spirk, in a 

* Virgil, Aeneid, 1 : 203 . 

135 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC txxvin,i6 

peace that is won for ever once in any contest fortune has 
been utterly defeated. 

‘I’m suffering severe pain/ you may say. Well does it 
stop you suffering it if you endure it in a womanish fashion? 
In the same way as the enemy can do far more damage to 
your army if it is in full retreat, every trouble that may come 
our way presses harder on the one who has turned tail and is 
giving ground. ‘But it’s really severe.’ Well, is courage only 
meant to enable us to bear up under what is not severe? 
Would you rather have an illness that’s long drawn out or 
one that’s short and quick? If it’s a long one it will have the 
odd interval, gi'^g one opportimity for rallying, granting 
one a good deal of time free of it, having of necessity to 
pause in order to build up again. An illness that’s swift and 
short will have one of two results: either oneself or it will be 
snuffed out. And what difference does it make whether I or 
it disappears? Either way there’s an end to the pain. 

Another thing which will help is to turn your mind to 
other thoughts and that way get away from your suHering. 
Call to mind things which you have done that have been 
upright or courageous; run over in your mind the fin^t 
parts that you have played. And cast your memory over t e 
things you have most admired; this is a time for recollect 
ing all those individuals of exceptional courage who have 
triumphed over pain: the man who steadily went on reading a 
book while he was having varicose veins cut out : the man w o 
never stopped smiling xmder torture albeit that this angere 
his tormentors into trying on him every instrument of crue 
they had. If pain has been conquered by a smile will it not e 
conquered by reason? And here you may mention anything 
you care to name, catarrh, a fit of uninterrupted coughing so 
violent that it brings up parts of the internal orgam, having 
one’s very entrails seared by a fever, thirst, having ^ 
■wrenched in different directions "with dislocation of the joints, 

136 



ixxvm, 22- 


LETTER LXXVIII 


or - worse than these - being stretched on the rack or burnt 
alive, or subjected to the red-hot plates and . instruments 
designed to re-open and deepen swelling wounds. There have 
been men who have undergone these experiences and never 
uttered a groan. ‘He needs more, he hasn’t asked for mercy 
— he needs more, he still hasn’t answered ... he needs more, 
he has actually smiled, and not a forced smile either.’ Surely 
pain is something you will want to smile at after this. 

But my illness has taken me away from my duties and 
Won t allow me to achieve anything.’ It is your body, not 
your mind as well, that is in the grip of ill health. Hence it 
uiay slow the feet of a runner and make the hands of a smith 
or cobbler less efficient, but if your mind is by habit of an 
active turn you may still give instruction and advice, listen 
3ud learn, inquire and remember. Besides, if you meet 
sicimess in a sensible manner, do you really think you are 
achieving nothing ? You will be demonstrating that even if one 
cannot always beat it one can always bear an illness. There is 
room for heroism, I assure you, in bed as anywhere else. 
War and the battle-front are not the only spheres in which 
proof is to be had of a spirited and fearless character: a 
persons bravery is ho less evident under the bed-clothes. 
There is something it lies open to you to achieve, and that is 
Waking the fight with illness a good one. If its threats or 
Wiportumties leave you quite unmoved, you are setting others 
^ signal example. How much scope there would be for re- 
nown if whenever we were sick we had an audience of specta- 
tors ! Be your own spectator anyway, your own applauding 
audience. 

Pleasures, moreover, are of two kinds. The physical pleas- 
nres are the ones which illness interferes with, though it does 
not do away with them altogether - indeed, if you take a 
true view of the matter, they are actually sharpened by illness, 

^ nian deriving greater pleasure from drinking something 

137 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC JJOcm,22 

when he is thirsty and finding food all the more welcome 
through being hungry, anything set before one after one has 
had to fast being greeted with a heightened appetite. But no 
doctor can refuse his patient those other, greater and surer 
pleasures, the pleasures of the mind and spirit. Anyone who 
follows these and genuinely knows them pays no attentiou 
whatever to all the enticements of the senses. *How very 
unfortunate he is,’ people say, ‘to be sick like that! "V^^y? 
Because he isn’t melting snow in his wine? Because he isn t 
breaking ice into a bumper goblet to keep the drink he has 
mixed in it chilled? Because Lucrine oysters arent being 
opened before him at his table? Because there isn t any hmt- 
hng of cooks about the dining-room, bringing in not just 
the viands themselves but the actual cooking apparatus along 
with them? For this is the latest innovation in luxurious 
living, having the kitchen accompany the dmner in to e 
table so as to prevent any of the food losing its heat ^ 
avoid anything being at a temperature insufficiently scalding 
for palates which are nowadays like leather. ^How very 
unfortunate he is to be sick,’ they say. In. fact hell he eatmg 
just as much as he’ll digest. There won t be a who e o^ 
lying somewhere where people can see it, conveying ^ 
impression that it has been banished from the table as e^ 
too cheap and ordinary a piece of meat to be on it, nor \ 
he have his troUey piled high with - now that people thmK 
it not quite nice to see the whole bird - carved breast of ^ • 
And what’s so bad about your being deprived of that, ou 
may be eating like a sick man, but you’ll at last be eating m 

the way a healthy man should. . , 

But given one thing we shall find it easy to put up wi 
potions and warm drinks and ail the rest of it - all the t ing 
that seem unbearable to people who have become ’ 
who have become soft through a life of luxury, ailmg m 
in the mind than they ever are in the body; the one req 

138 


ixxvin ,29 LETTER LXXVIII 

meat is that we cease to dread death. And so we shall as soon 
as we have learnt to distinguish the good things and the bad 
things in this world. Then and then only shall we stop being 
weary of living as well as scared of dying. For a life spent 
viewing all the variety, the majesty, the sublimity in things 
around us can never succumb to eiwui: the feeling that one is 
tired of being, of existing, is usually the result of an idle and 
inactive leisure. Truth will never pall on someone who ex- 
plores the world- of nature, wearied as a person will be by the 
spurious things. Moreover, even if death is on the way with a 
summons for him, though it come all too early, though it 
cut him off in the prime of life, he has experienced every 
reward that the very longest life can offer, having gained 
extensive knowledge of the world we live in, having learnt 
that time adds nothing to the Jdner things in life. Whereas 
aJiy life must needs seem short to people who measure it in 
terms of pleasures which through their empty nature are 
incapable of completeness. 

Let these reflections promote your recovery, and meanwhile 
do find ^time for our correspondence. Time will bring ^ 
together again one of these days; and when, as it will, the 
reunion comes, however short it may last, knowing how to 
niake the most of it wiU turn it into a long one. As Posidonius 
said, ‘In a single day there lies open to men of learmng more 
than there ever does to the unenlightened in the longest of 
lifetimes.’ In the meantime cling tooth and nail to the follow- 
ing rule; not to give in to adversity, never to trust prosperity, 
and always take full note of fortune’s habit of behaving just 
^ she pleases, treating her as if she were actually going to o 
everything it is in her power to do. Whatever you have been 
expecting for some time comes as less of a shock. 


139 


ixxxm,! 


LETTER LXXXIII 

You demand an account of my days - generally as well as 
individually. You think well of me if you suppose that there is 
nothing in them for me to hide. And we should, indeed, live 
as if we were in public view, and think, too, as if someone 
could peer into the inmost recesses of our hearts'- which 
someone can ! For what is to be gained if something is con- 
cealed from man when nothing is barred from God? He is 
present in otir minds, in attendance in the midst of our 
thoughts - although by ‘attendance’ I do not mean to suggest 
that he is not at times absent from our thoughts. I shall do as 
you say, then, and gladly give you a record of what I do and 
in what order. I shall put myself under observation straight 
away and undertake a review of my day - a course which is 
of the utmost benefit. What really ruins our characters is the 
fact that none of us looks back over his life. We think about 
. what we are going to do, and only rarely ^of that, and fail to 
think about what we have done, yet any plans for the future 
are dependent on the past. 

Today has been unbroken. No one has robbed me of any 
part of it. It has been wholly divided between my bed and 
my reading. A very small part of it has been given over to 
physical exercise - and on this account I’m grateful for oid 
age, for the exercise costs me little trouble, I ordy have to 
stir and I’m weary, and that after all is the end of exercise 
even for the strongest. Interested in having my trainers. 
One’s enough for me - Pharius, a likeable yoimg fellow, as 
you know, but he’s due for a change. I’m looking now for 
someone rather more youthful. He in fact declares that 
we’re both at the same climacteric since we’re both losing 
our teeth. But I’ve reached the stage where I can only keep 

140 



txxxm, 9 LETTER LXXXIII 

tip with liim with difficulty when we re out for a run ^d 
hefore many days are out I won’t be able to keep up with him 
at all. See what daily exercise does for one. When two peop e 
are going in opposite directions there s soon a ig istance 
between them: he’s coming up at die same time as I m going 
downwards, and you know how much quic er trave i 
the second of these directions. But I m wrong, e age^ 
at isn’t one that is ‘going downwards - its one ats 

headlong descent. , , i i. 

However, you’d like to hear how todays race ended 

Well, we made it a tie, something that docsn t often 
with runners. After this, more a spell of exhaustion an 
exercise, I had a cold plunge - cold, with me, meaiung J 
short of warml Here I am, once celebrated as a evo e 

cold baths, regularly paying my respects ^ v 

first of January and jumping into the Maiden Pool m just the 

same way as I read, wrote and spoke some sentence or ° 

every New Year in order to ensure good luck m ® 

year; and now I’ve shifted my scene, of operations, ir 

the Tiber,- then to my own pool here, which, even when 1 m 

feeling my heartiest and don’t cheat, has ha t e c 

off it by the sun; it’s a short step to a hot 

dung is breakfast, which consists of some y ’ 

table laid, and no need to wash the hands 

then have the briefest of naps. You know t ^ ^ ° ^ .t, ’ 

of dropping off for a moment or two, just s ippmg ° , 

harness, as you might say. I find it enough^ to ave s p 

stopped being awake. Sometimes I know I ve een as p, 

sometimes merely guess I have been j 

Zeno was a very great man as well as the oun er 
Stoic school, a school with an unequalled recor or 
ageous and saintly living; well, listen to t e way m w 
* A total of about 85 lines of this letter have been omitted as not of 
interest or repeating thoughts expressed elsewhere. 

141 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC IJC!Ccm,9 

desiring to deter us from drunkenness, he deduces the principle 
that the good man won’t get drunk. ‘No person who is 
drunk,’ he says, ‘is entrusted with a secret: the good man is 
entrusted with a secret: therefore, the good man will not get 
drunk.’ Watch how ridiculous he’s made to look when we 
counter with a single syllogism on the same pattern (of the 
many we could advance it’s sufficient to instance one). ‘No 
person who is asleep is entrusted wnth a secret: the good man 
is entrusted with a secret: therefore, the good man do^ not 
go to sleep ’ 

Now just let each of us name for himself the people he 
knows can be trusted with a secret though they can t be 
trusted with a bottle. I’ll give, all the same, one soHtary 
example myself, just to prevent its being lost to human 
memory! Life needs a stock of noteworthy examples; nor 
need we always go running to antiquity for them. Lucius 
Piso was drunk from the very moment of his appointment as 
Warden of the City of Rome. He regularly spent most of the 
night wining and dining in company, and slept ffiom then 
rmtil aroimd midday, noon to him being early morning; 
nevertheless discharged his duties, which embraced the 
general welfare of the whole city, with the utmost efficient* 
The late emperor Augustus as well as Tiberius entrusted him 
wnth secret orders, the former on appointing him governor 
■ of Thrace (the conquest of which he completed), the lat^r 
when he left Rome for Campania, leaving behind him m ® 
capital many objects of distrust and hostihty. I imagine it 
because Piso’s drunken habits had been such a success so 
as he was concerned that Tiberius later appointed Cossus to 
be Prefect of the City. This man, otherwise dignified 
controlled, steeped himself in liquor, soaking it up to such an 
extent that on one occasion in the Senate, having come ere 
straight from a party, he succumbed to a slumber from w c 
nothing could rouse him and had to be carried out. Yet 


142 



I^^xxin,24 LETTER LXXXIII 

<3i<l not stop Tiberius writing (in his own hand) a number of 
letters to Cossus the contents of which he did not consider 
suitable for communication even to his ministers ; and Cossus 
never let slip a single secret, whether private or official. . . . 

If you want to arrive at the conclusion that the good man 
ought not to get drunk, why set about it with syllogisms? 
Tell people how disgusting it is for a man to pump more 
into himself than he can hold and not to know the capacity 
of his own stomach. Tell them of all the things men do that 
Aey would blush at sober, and that drunkenness is nothing 
out a state of self-induced insanity. For imagine the drunken 
Wans behaviour extended over several days; would you 
hesitate to think him out of his mind? As it is, the difference 
IS simply one of duration, not of degree. Point to the example 
of Alexander of Macedon, stabbing his dearest and truest 
taend, Clitus, at a banquet, and wanting to die, as indeed he 
should have done, when he realized the enormity of what he 
Oad done. Drunkenness inflames and lays bare every vice, 
Wmovmg the reserve that acts as a check on impulses to 
^ong behaviour. For people abstain from forbidden things 
^ more often through feelings of inhibition when it comes 
to doing what is wrong than through any will to good. . . . 
^dd to this the drunkard’s ignorance of his situation, his 
indistinct, uncertain speech, his inability to walk straight, his 
unsteady eye and swimming head, with his very home in a - 
state of motion - as if the whole house had been set spinning 
oy some cyclone - and the tortures in his stomach as the wine 
ferments 

Where is the glory in mere capacity? When the victory 
rests with you, when all the company lie prostrate around 
ynu, slumbering or vomiting, declining all your calls for 
another toast, when you find yourself the only person at the 
P^ty still on your feet, when your mighty prowess has 
enabled you to beat all comers and no one has proved able 


143 



LETTERS PROM A STOIC Lxxm, 24 

to tnatcli your intake, a barrel is none tbe less enougk to 
beat you. 

What else was it but drinking to excess, together with a 
passion for Cleopatra itself as potent as drink, that ruined that 
great and gifted man, Mark Antony, dragging him down into 
foreign ways of living and un-Roman vices? This it was that 
made him an enemy of the state; this is what made him no 
match for his enemies; it was this that made him cruel, 
having the heads of his country’s leading men brought in to 
him at the dinner-table, identifying the hands and features of 
liquidated opponents in the course of banquets marked by 
sumptuous magnificence and regal pomp, still thirsting for 
blood when filled to the full with wine 

Explain, then, why the good man should avoid getting 
drunk, using facts, not words, to show its ugliness and offen- 
siveness. Prove - and an easy task it is -- that so-called pleasures, 
when they go beyond a certain limit, are but punishments. . . • 


LETTER LXXXVI 

Here I am, staying at the country house which once belonged 
to Scipio of Africa himself. I am writing after paying my 
respects to his departed spirit as well as to an altar which I 
rather think may be the actual tomb of that great soldier. 
Eds soul will have gone to heaven, returned in fact to the 
place from which it came. What convinces me of this is not 
the size of the armies he commanded - for Camhyses equally 
had such armies and Camhyses was merely a madman wno 
turned his madness to good account - but his quite exceptio^ 
self-restraint and sense of duty. This is something in mm 
which I find even more deserving of admiration at the tune 
when he finally left his coimtry than during the time when he 

144 



5 tUTTEIl LXXXVI 

v.’as fighting for her. Was Scipio to stay in Rome? Or was 
Rome to stay a free democracy' ? That was then the choice, 
^^lat did Scipio say? T have no wish/ he said, ‘to kave the 
effect of weakening in tlic least degree our laws or institutions. 
All Rontan citizens must be equal before the law. I ask my 
countiy-, tlicn, to make the most of what I have done for her, 
but wthout me. If she owes it to me that she is today a free 
countr)', let me also prove that she is free. If my stature has 
grovm too great for her best interests, then out I go.’ Am I 
not justified in admiring that nobility of character whicli 
led him to retire, to go into voluntar)' e.xile to relieve the 
state of an embarr.assing burden? Events had come to the 
pomt where either Scipio or democracy was going to suffer 
the other’s hands. Neither of these two tilings could justly 
kc permitted to happen. So he gave way to her constitution 
^d, proposing that the nation should be no less indebted to 
for his absence from the scene tlian for Hannibal’s, he 
"tv’cnt offinto retirement at Litemum. 

I have seen the house, which is built of squared stone 
blocks; the wall surrounding the park; and tlie towers built 
out on both sides of the house for purposes of defence; the 
^’^cll, concealed among the greenery and out-buildings, with 
efficient water to provide for the needs of a whole army; 
^d the tiny little bath, situated after the old-fashioned custom 
an ill-lit comer, our ancestors believing that the only place 
^'kere one could properly have a hot bath was in the dark, 
h Was this which started in my mind reflections that occa- 
sioned me a good deal of enjoyment as I compared Scipio’s 
of life and our own. In diis comer the famous Terror of 
Carriage, to whom Rome owes it that she has only once* in 
er history been captured, used to wash a body weary from 
Work on the farm! For he kept himself fit through toil, 
^rivating his fields by his own labour, as was the regular 
* By the Gauls in 390 B. c. 

145 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC ixxxvr,5 

way in the old days. And this was the ceUing, dingy in the 
extreme, under which he stood; and this the equally undis- 
tinguished paving that carried his weight. 

Who is there who could bear to have a bath in such 
surroxmdings nowadays? We tliink ourselves poorly off, 
living like paupers, if the walls are not ablaze wiA large and 
costly circular mirrors, if our Alexandrian marbles are not 
decorated with panels of Numidian marble, if the whole of 
their surface has not been given a decorative overlay of 
elaborate patterns having all the variety of fresco murals, 
unless the ceiling cannot be seen for glass, unless the pools into 
which we lower bodies with all the strength drained out of 
them by lengthy periods in the sweating room are edged with 
Thasian marble (which was once the rarest of sights even in a 
temple), unless the water pours from silver taps. Aixd so & 
we have only been talking about the ordinary fellows 
plumbing. What about the bath-houses of certain former 
slaves? Look at their arrays of statues, their assemblies of 
columns that do not support a thing but are put up pmely 
for ornament, just for the sake of spending money. Look at 
the cascades of water splashing noisily down from one level 
to the next. We have actually come to such a pitch of choosi- 
ness that we object to walking on anything other than precious 
stones. 

In this bathroom of Scipio’s there are tiny chinks - yo’i 
could hardly call them windows - pierced in the masonry or 
the wall in such a way as to let in light without in any way 
weakening its defensive character. Nowadays ‘moth-hole is 
the way some people speak of a bathroom unless it has been 
designed to catch the sun through enormous windows an 
day long, unless a person can acquire a tan at the same time 
as he is having a bath, unless he has views from the bath over 
countryside and sea. 

The result is that bath-houses which drew admiring 

146 



IXXXVI, 11 LETTER LXXXVI 

crowds when they were first opened are actually dismissed as 
aatiquated as soon as extravagance has hit on any novelty 
calculated to put its own best previous efforts in the shade. 
There was a time when bath-houses were few and far be- 
tween, and never in the least luxuriously appointed — and 
why should they have been, considering that they were 
designed for use, not for diversion, and that admission only 
cost you a copper? There were no showers in those days, 
and the water did not come in a continuous gush as if from 
a hot spring. People did not think it mattered then how clear 
the water was in which they were going to get rid of the dirt. 
Heavens, what a pleasure it is to go into one of those half-lit 
bath-houses with their ordinary plastered ceilings, where you 
knew that Cato himself as aedile — or Fabius Maximus, or 
one of the Cornelii — regulated the warmth of your water 
with his own hand I For, however high their rank, it was one 
of the duties of the aediles to enter all such premises as were 
open to the public and enforce standards of cleanliness and a 
healthy sort of temperature, sufficient for practical purposes, 
not the kind of heat which has recently come into fashion, 
niore like that of a furnace — so much so- indeed that a slave 
convicted on a criminal charge might well be sentenced to 
he bathed alive! There doesn’t seem to me to be any difference 
now between 'your bath’s warm’ and-, your bath s boiling . 

How primitive 1 ’ Such is some people s verdict these days 
nn Scipio because he did not have extensive areas of glass to 
kt the daylight into the perspiring room, because it w^ not a 
habit with him to stew in strong sunlight, letting the time go 
by until he was perfectly cooked in his own bathroom. 
a sorry wretch of a man! He didn’t know how to live! 
He’d take his bath in water that was never filtered and often 
cloudy, practically muddy in fact after any heavy rain, 
^cll, it (Ji(J jiQt make much difference to Scipio if this was 
die kind of bath he had; he went there to wash off sweat, not 


147 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC ixxxvi, n 

scent. And what do you think some people will say to this? 
‘Well, I don’ t envy Scipio ; if that was the kind of bath he had 
all the time, it was a real exile’s life that he was leading.’ 

Yes, and what’s more, if you must know, he didn’t even 
have a bath every day. Writers who have left us a record of 
life in ancient Rome tell us that it was just their arms and legs, 
which of course they dirtied working, that people washed 
every day, bathing all over only once a week on market day. 
‘Obviously,’ someone will comment, ‘there must have been 
times when they were positively disgusting.’ And what do 
you think they stank of? I’ll tell you - of hard soldiering, of 
hard work, of all that goes to make up a man. Men are 
dirtier creatures now than they ever were in die days before 
the coming of spotlessly clean bathrooms. What is it Horace 
says when he wants to describe a man noted and indeed 
notorious for the inordinate lengths to which he carried 
personal fastidiousness? 


Budllus stinks of scented lozenges.* 

Produce Budllus today and he might just as well ‘stink like 
a goat’. He would be in the same position as the Gargonius 
with whom Horace contrasted him. For nowadays it is not 
even* enough to use some scented ointment - it must be re- 
applied two or three times a day as a precaution against its 
evaporation on theperspn. I say nothing about the way people 
preen themselves on the perfume it carries, as if it were tneir 


ov/n. 


If all this strikes you as being excessively disapproving yo“ 
must put it down to^the house’s atmosphere! During my stay 
in it I’ve learnt from Aegialus (who’s the present owner o 
the estate, and gives a great deal of attention to its management; 
that trees can be transplanted even when quite old - a lesson 
that we old men need to learn when we reckon that every 
* Horace, Satires. 1 : 2.27 and 1 : 4.92. Horace actually wrote Rufillus- 

148 



IXXXVI, i 8 LETTER LXXXVI 

one of US who puts down a new olive plantation is doing so 
for someone else’s benefit - now that iVe seen him carefully 
transplanting one of a number of trees that had given fruit 
unstintingly over three and even four seasons. So you too can 
enjoy the shade of the tree which 

Is slow in coming up, is there to give 

Your grandsons shade in later years, long hence,* 

according to our Virgil, who was not concerned with the 
facts but with poetic effect, his object being the pleasure of 
the reader, not the instruction of the farmer. To pick out 
only one example, let me quote the following passage which 
I felt compelled to find fault with today. 

In Spring’s the time for sowing beans; then, too, 

The crumbling furrows. Clover, welcome you, 

. And millet, too, receives her yearly care.f 

I leave you to conclude from this whether the crops mentioned 
, are to be planted at the same time as each other, and whether 
in each case they’re to be sown in spring. As I write, it s 
June, getting on for July now, too, and I ve seen people 
harvesting beans and sowing millet on the same day. 

To get back to our oUve plantation, I saw two different 
naetho'ds of planting used here. In the first, taking sizeable 
trees and lopping off the branches, cutting them back to a 
foot from the stem, Aegialus transplanted them complete 
■with crown, pruning away the roots and leaving only the 
actual base, the part to which the roots are attached. This he 
placed in the hole with an application of manure, and not 
only earthed it in but trod and stamped the soil down hard. 
He says that nothing gives such good results as this packing 
them down’, as he calls it; what it does, of course, is to keep 

* "Virgil, Georgies, 11 : 58. 

•}• Virgil, Georgies, 1 :z15-T-6. 

149 


us .~8 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC ixxxvr, i8 

out cold and wind; and apart from that, the tree is less liable 
to be shifted, thus allowing the yoimg roots to sprout and 
get a grip on the soil when they are inevitably tender and 
tom from their precarious holds by the slightest disturb- 
ance. He also scrapes the crown of the tree before covering 
it up, because (he says) new roots emerge wherever the wood 
imdemeath has been laid bare. The tree, again, should not 
stand higher than three or four feet above the ground. This 
will ensure, right from the start, green growth from the 
bottom upwards instead of a large area of dry and withered 
stem of the sort one sees in old olive-groves. 

The second method was as follows: talcing branches of 
the type one normally finds on very young trees, strong 
but at the same time having soft bark, he planted them out 
in the same sort of way. These grow rather more slowly but 
since they spring fiom what is virtually a cutting, there is 
nothing scraggy or unsightly about them. 

Another thing I’ve seen is the transplanting of an old vine 
fi:om its supporting tree; in this case, one has to gather up 
with it, ifpossible,'even the minute root-hairs, and in addition 
give it a more generous covering of soil so that it throws 
out roots firom the stem as well. I have seen such plantings 
not only in the month of February but even at the end of 
March, the vines going on to embrace and take good bold o 
their new elm trees. Aegialus also says that all trees which are 
stout in the stem, if one may so term them, should have the 
benefit of a supply of water stored in tanks; if this is a success, 
we have brought the rain under our control. 

But I don’t propose to tell you any more, in case I turn 
you into a rival grower in the same way as Aegialus has 
turned me into a competitor of his I 


150 



ixxxvm, 4 


LETTER LXXXVIII 

You want to know my attitude towards liberal studies. 
Well, I have no' respect for any study whatsoever if its end is 
the making of money. Such studies are to me tmworthy 
ones. They involve the putting out of skills to hire, and are 
only of value in so far as they may develop the mind without 
occupying it for long. Time should be spent on them o y 
so long as one’s mental abilities are not up to dealing wi 
higher things. They are our apprenticeship, not our real work. 
Why ‘liberal studies’ are so called is obvious; it is because 
they are the ones considered worthy of a free man. But 
there is really only one liberal study that deserves the name - 
because it makes a person free - and that is the pursmt o 
’wisdom. Its high ideals, its steadfastness and spirit make ^ 
other studies puerile and puny in comparison. Do you re y 
think there is anything to be said for the others when you 
find among the people who profess to teach them ® 

most reprehensible and worthless characters you could have 
as teachers? All right to have studied that sort of thing once, 
but not to be studying them now. 

The question has sometimes been posed whetMr ese 
liberal studies make a man a better person. But m fact they 
fio not aspire to any knowledge of how to do this, 
claim to do it. Literary scholarship concerns itself ^ 
research into language, or history if a rather broader le is 
preferred, or, extending its range to the very limit, poetry, 
'^ch of these paves the way to virme? Attentiveness to 
^ords, analysis of syllables, accounts of myths, laying own 
the principles of prosody? What' is there in all this that dis- 
pels fear, roots out desire or reins in passion? Or let us take a 
look at music, at geometry; you will not frnd anythmg m 
' * A liber. 

I51 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC ixxxvin,4 

them which tells us not to be afraid of this or desire that -and 
if anyone lacks this kind of knowledge all his other knowledge 
is valueless to him. The question is whether or not that sort 
of scholar is teaching virtue. For if he is not, he will not even 
he imparting it incidentally. If he is teaching it he is a philo- 
sopher. If you really want to know how far these persons are 
from the position of being moral teachers, observe the absence 
of connexion between all the things they study; if they were 
teaching one and the same thing a connexion- would be evi- 
dent.' Unless perhaps they manage to persuade you that 
Homer was actually a philosopher - though they refute their 
case by means of the very passages which lead them to 
infer it. For at one moment they make him a Stoic, giving 
nothing but virtue his approval, steering clear of pleasure, 
not even an offer of immortality inducing him to stoop to the 
dishonourable; at another they make him an Epicurean, 
praising the way of life of a society passing its days at peace 
and ease, in an atmosphere of dinner-parties and music- 
making; at another he becomes a Peripatetic, with a three- 
fold classification of things good; at another an Academic, 
stating that nothing is certain. It is obvious that none of these 
philosophies is to be found in Homer for the very reason that 
they all are, the doctrines being mutually incompatible. Even 
suppose we grant these people that Homer was a philosopher, 
he became a wise man, surely, before he could recite^^y 
epics, so that what we should be learm'ng are 
made him wise. And there is no more point 
ing which was the earlier, Homer or Hesiod, 
be in my knowing the reason why Hecuba, 

than Helen, carried her years so unsuccessfu..^ 

would ask this kind of scholar, do you suppose is the point ot 
trying to establish the ages of Patroclus and AchiUes? And 
are you more concerned to find out where Ulysses’ wander- 
ings took him than to find a way of putting an end to our own 

152 


vestigat- 



Lxxxvin, 10 LBTTER LXXXVIII 

perpetual %vandcrings? We haven’t the time to spare to hear 
whether it was between Italy and Sicily that he ran into a 
storm or somewhere outside die area of the world we mow 
wanderings as extensive as his could never in fact have ta 'en 
place inside so limited an area - when every day we re running 
into our own storms, spiritual storms, and driven by vice 
into all the troubles that Ulysses ever knew. We re not spared 
those eye-distracring beauties, or attackers. We too 
contend in various places with savage monsters reve mg m 
human blood, insidious voices that beguile our e^s, s ip 
wrecks and all manner of misfortune. What you sho e 
teaching me is how I may attain sucli a love for my country, 
my father and my wife, and keep on course for those i e s 
even after shipmeck. Wliy go into the question whether or 
not Penelope completely took in her contemporaries m 
far from being a model of wifely purity, any mcne an e 
question whether or not she had a feeling that die m^ she 
was looking at was Ulysses before she actually knew it . eac 
me instead what purity is, how much value lere is m i , 

whether it lies in the body or in the mind. ^ 

Turning to the musical scholar I say this. You teac me 
how bass and treble harmonize, or how strings pro ucmg 
different notes can give rise to concord. I "wou rat er y 
brought about some harmony in my min an got my 
thoughts into tune. You show me which are the p am i e 
keys. I would rather you showed me how to avoid uttermg 

plaintive notes when things go against me in life. . _ 

The geometrician teaches me how to work out e size 
my estates - rather than how to work out how muc a m 
Heeds in order to have enough. He teaches me ’ 

putting my fingers into the service of avarice, mstea o ^ 

mg me that there is no point whatsoever m t at ^r 
computation and that a person is none the happier for ha^g 
properties which tire accountants out, or to put it ano 

153 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC txxxvra, lo 

way, how superfluous a man’s possessions are when he would 
he a picture of misery if you forced him to start counting up 
single-handed how much he possessed. What use is it to me 
to be able to divide a piece of land into equal areas if I’m 
unable to divide it with a brother? What use is the ability to 
measure out a portion of an acre with an accuracy extending 
even to the bits which elude the measuring rod if I’m upset 
when some high-handed neighbour encroaches slightly on 
my property? The geometrician teaches me how I may avoid 
losing any fraction of my estates, but what I really want to 
learn is how to lose the lot and still keep smiling. ‘Tut I m 
being turned off the land my father and grandfather owned 
before me ! ’ Well, so what? "'K^o owned the land before your 
grandfather? Are you in a position to identify the conunumty, 
let alone the individual, to whom it originally belonged? 
You entered on it as'a tenant, not an absolute owner. Whose 
tenant, you 'may ask? Your heir’s, and that only if you re 
lucky. The legal experts say that acquisition by prescription 
never applies where the property concerned is actually public 
property. Well, what you possess and call your own is really 
public property, or mankind’s property for that matter. Oh, 
the marvels of geometry! You geometers can calculate the 
areas of circles, can reduce any given shape to a square, can 
state the distances separating stars. Nothing’s outside yot^ 
scope when it comes to measurement. Well, if you re suen 
an expert, measure a man’s soul; tell me how large or how 
small that is. You can define a straight line; what use is that 
to you if you’ve no idea what straighmess means in hfe? 

I come now to the person who prides himself on OiS 
familiarity with the heavenly bodies: 

Towards which quarter chilly Saturn draws. 

The orbits in which burning Mercury roams.* 

* Virgil, Georgies, 1:336-7. The person meant is of course the 
astrologer, not the astronomer. 


154 



ixxxvin,i7 LETTER LXXXVIII 

What is to be gained from tliis sort of knowledge? Am I 
supposed to feel anxious v/hen Saturn and Mars are in opposi- 
tion or Mercury sets in the evening in full view of Saturn, 
instead of coming to Icam that bodies like these are equally 
propitious wherever they are, and incapable of change in 
any case. They are swept on in a patli from wliich they cannot 
escape, their motion governed by an uninterrupted sequence 
of destined events, making their reappearances in cycles that 
arc fixed. They cidicr actuate or signalize all that comes about 
in. the universe. If every event is brought about by them, how 
is mere familiarity widi a process wliidi is unchangeable going 
to be of any help? If they are pointers to events, what differ- 
ence does it make to be aware in advance of things you can- 
not escape? They are going to happen whether you know 
about them or not. 

If you observe the hasting sun and watch 
The stars processing through the skies, the day 
That follows will not prove you wrong; no^will 
Deceptive cloudfrce nights then take you in. 

I ve taken sufficient precautions, more than sufficient precau 
dons, to ensure that I’m not taken in by deceptive phenomena. 
At this you’ll protest: ‘Can you really say the day at 
follows never proves me wrong”? Surely anything t at 
happens which one didn’t know in advance was going to 
happen proves one wrong?’ Well, I don’t know what s going 
to happen; but I do know what’s capable of happening - ^ 
Rone of this will give rise to any protest on my part, m 
ready for everything. If I’m let off in any way, I in pleased. 
The day in question proves me wrong in a sense i it treats 
Rie leniently, but even so not really wrong, for just as 
know that anything is capable of happening so so o 
know that it’s not bound to happen. So I look for t e est 
^d am prepared for the opposite. 

* Virgil, Georgies, 1:424-^**® 

155 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC txxxvm, l8 

You 11 have to bear with me if I digress here. Nothing will 
induce me to accept painters into the list of liberal arts, any 
more than sculptors, marble-masons and all the other attend- 
ants on extravagance. I must equally reject those oil and dust 
practitioners, the wrestlers, or else I shall have to include in 
the list the perfumers and cooks and all the others who place 
their talents at the service of our pleasures. What is there, I 
ask you, that’s liberal about those characters who vomit up 
their food to empty their stomachs for more, with their 
bodies stuffed full and their minds all starved and inactive? 
Can we possibly look on this as a liberal accomplishment 
for the youth of Rome, whom our ancestors trained to stand 
up straight and throw a javelin, to toss the caber, and manage 
a horse, and handle weapons? They never used to teach 
their children anything which could be learned in a reclming 
posture. That kind of training, nevertheless, doesn’t teach or 
foster moral values any more than the other. What’s the use, 
after all, of mastering a horse and controlling him with the 
reins at full gallop if you’re carried away yourself by totally 
unbridled emotions? What’s the use of overcoming opponent 
after opponent in the wrestling or boxing rings if you can be 
overcome by your temper? 

‘So we don’t,’ you may ask, ‘in fact gain anything from 
the liberal studies?’ As far as character is concerned, no, but 
we gain a good deal from them in other directions - just as 
even these admittedly inferior arts which we’ve been talking 
about, the ones that are based on use of the hands, make 
important contributions to the amenities of life although the/ 
have nothing to do with character. Why then do we give 
our sons a liberal education? Not because it can make them 
morally good but because it prepares, the mind for ^ 
acquisition of moral values. Just as that grounding in gramm^> 
as they called it in the old days, in which boys are given their 
elementary schooling, does not teach them the liberal arts ut 

156 



l3Ciacvm,3l LETTER LXXXVIII 

prepares the ground for knowledge of them in due course, so 
when it comes to character the liberal arts open the way to it 

rather than carry the personality all the way there * 

In this connexion I feel prompted to take a look at indi- 
vidual qualities of character. Bravery is the one which treats 
with contempt things ordinarily inspiring fear, despising and 
defying and demolishing all the things that terrify us and set 
chains on htunan freedom. Is she in any way fortified by 
liberal studies? Take loyalty, the most sacred quality that 
can be found in a htunan breast, never corrupted by a bribe, 
never driven to betray by any form of compulsion, crying: 
Beat me, bum me, put me to death, I shall not talk — the 
Riore the torture probes my secrets the deeper I’ll hide them! 
Can liberal studies create that kind of spirit? Take self- 
control, the quality which takes command of the pleasures; 
some she dismisses out of hand, unable to tolerate them; 
others she merely regulates, ensuring that they are brought 
within healthy limits; never approaching pleasures for their 
own sake, she realizes that the ideal limit with things you 
desire is not the amormt you would like to but the amount 
you ought to take. Humanity is the quality which stops one 
eing arrogant towards' one’s fellows, or being acrimonious, 
hi Words, in actions, in emotions she reveals herself as kind 
3nd good-natured towards all. To her the troubles of anyone 
c se are her own, and anything that benefits herself she 
Welcomes primarily because it will be of benefit to someone 
Se. Do the liberal studies inculcate these attitudes? No, no 
^ore than they do simplicity, or modesty and restraint, or 
h^gality and thrift, or mercy, the mercy that is as sparing 
With mother’s blood as though it were its own, knowing 
^t it is not for man to make wasteful use of man. 

Someone will ask me how I can say that liberal studies 

. * 45 lines of the Latin are omitted for their relative lack of 

interest (§§21 to 28). 


157 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC ixxxvni,3l 

are of no help towards morality when I’ve just been saying 
that there’s no attaining morality without them. My an^^ 
would he this: there’s no attaining morality withom 
either, hut there’s no connexion between morality an o 
The fact that a ship can’t begin to exist without the tm 
of which it’s built doesn’t mean that the timbers are o 
to it. There’s no reason for you to assume that, A 
something without which Y could never have come j 
Y came about as a result of the assistance of X. And m ^ 
can actually be argued that the attainment o 
perfectly possible without the liberal studies, 
moral values are things which have to be learnt, y 
not learnt through these studies. Besides, what groun 
I possibly have for supposing that a person w ° 
acquaintance with books will never be a wise rn 
wisdom does not lie in books. Wisdom pu ^ 
but truths - and I’m not sure that the memory isnt 
reliable when it has no external aids to fall back on.^ j _ t*; is 
There is nothing small or cramped about 
something calling for a lot of room to move. ^ 

questions to be answered concerning pltysiol as 
human matters, questions about the past and 
questions about things eternal arid things ephemer , q 
about time itself. On this one subject of time just oo ^ 
many questions there are. To start with, oes it 
existence of its own? Next, does anything exist prior t 
independently of it? Did it begin with the umverse, or ^ 
exist even before then on the groimds that there w 
thing in existence before the umverse? There are ^ 

questions about the soul alone -where it comes om, . ^ 

nature is, when it begins to exist, md how 
existence; whether it passes from one place to moth » 
house, so to speak, on transfer to successive hvmg 
taVmg on a different form with each, or is no m 

158 



ixxxvm, 37 LBTTER LXXXVIII 

once in. service and is then released to roam the tmiyer^, 
■whether it is a corporeal substance or not; what it 'wi o 
•when it ceases to act through us, how it will employ 
freedom once it has escaped its cage here; whether it "Wi 
forget its past and become conscious of its real natme torn 
die actual moment of its parting from the body and deparmre 
for its new home on high. Whatever the field of physwa or 
moral sciences you deal with, you will be given no test y t e 
mass of things to be learnt or investigated. And to ena e 
matters of this range and scale to find unrestricted hos^ta ity 
in our minds, everything superfluous must be tume out. 
Virtue will not bring herself to enter the limited space we 
offer her; something of great size requires plenty o rooin. 
bet everything else be evicted, and your heart comp ete y 
opened to her. ^ i f 

‘But it’s a nice thing, surely, to be familiar with ^ ° ° 
subjects.’ Well, in that case let us retain just as.much ot mem 
as we need. Would you consider a person open to criticism 
for putting superfluous objects on the same leve as re y 
useful ones by arranging on display in his house a w o ® ^ 

of costly articles, but not for cluttering himself up with a lo 
of superfluous furniture in the way of learning? o wan 
know more than is sufficient is a form of 
Apart from which this kind of obsession with ^ 3.^^ . r j 
hims people into pedantic, irritating, tactless, se -satis le 
bores, not learning what they need simply becaus^ ey 
dieir time learning things they will never ^ ^ 

f^idymus wrote four thousand works: I should ee 
bim if he had merely read so many useless works. In tnese 
Works he discusses such questions as Homer s^ origin, 

Was Aeneas’ real mother, whether Anacreon s 
life was more that of a lecher or that of a drunkard, 

Sappho slept with anyone who asked her, and other 
fhat would be better unlearned if one actually ew 


159 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC ..‘Lxxxvm, 

Don t you go and tell me now that life is long eriough i 
this sort of thing! When you come to writers in our ov 
school, for that matter, I’ll show you plenty of works whii 
could do with some ruthless pruning. It costs a person i 
enormous amount of time (and other people’s ^s an eno: 
mous amount of boredom) before he earns such complimen 
as ‘What a learned person ! ’ Let’s be content with the much le: 
fashionable label, ‘What a good man 
What about thinking how much time you lose throug 
constantly being taken up with ofEdal matters, privat 
matters or ordinary everyday matters, through sleep, througs 
ill health? Measure your life: it just does not have room fc, 
so much. V 

I have been speaking about liberal studies. Yet look at th^ 
amount of useless and superfluous matter to be found in th, 
philosophers. Even they have descended to the level of draw, 
ing distinctions between the uses of different syllables anf 
discussing the proper meanings of prepositions and conjunc- ' 
tions. They have come to envy the philologist 'and th(J 
mathematician, and they have taken over all the inessential 
elements in those studies - with the result that they knov' 
more about devoting care and attention to their speech thar^ 
about devoting such attention to their lives. Listen and lei'- 
me show you the sorry consequences to which subtlety'' 
carried too far can lead, and what an enemy it is to truth. 
Protagoras declares that it is possible to argue either side of 
any question with equal force, even the question whether oi 
not one can equally argue either side of any question! 
Nausiphahes declares that of the things which appear to us 
to exist, none exists any more than it does not exist. Par- 
menides declares that of all these phenomena none exists 
except the whole. Zeno of Elea has dismissed all such diffi- 
* 15 lines (§§39 to 40, on further examples of worthless learning) are^ 
omitted. ^ 

160 



C,1 . ■ LETTER XC ■ ' 

ulties by introducing another; he declares that nothing 
xists. The Pyrrhonean, Megarian, Eretri^ and Acadenuc 
chools pursue more or less similar lines; the ast 
ntroduced a new branch of knowledge, non-know e ge. 

Well, all these theories you should just toss on top ot that 
ieap of superfluous hberal studies. The people I st inentione 
provide me with knowledge which is not going to e o any 
use to me, while the others snatch away from me any opes o 
ever acquiring any knowledge at all. Superfluous ow e g 
would be preferable to no knowledge. One side me no . 
guiding light to direct my vision towards the trut > ^ ^ ^ . 

other just gouges my eyes out. If I believe Protagoras ere is 
j nothing certain in the imiverse; if I believe Nausip anes 
* there is iust the one certainty, that nothing is certam, 

■ karmenides, only one thing exists; if Zeno, not even 
^ ^en what are we? The things that surroimd us, the thmgs 
hich we live, what are they? Our who e inverse 
tore than a semblance of reality, perhaps a . 

lance, perhaps one without substance altoge er. 
nd it diSicult to say which of these people animy me , 

lose who would have us know nothing ^ ® ^‘ncr that 
eflise even to leave us the small satisfaction o o g 

ve know nothing. 


letter XC 

^Ho can doubt, my dear Lucilius -^^e^gift^^phAo^sop^'y- 
^mortal gods, but that living well is g , . ^ 

A corol4 of thU would be the dte 

debt to pMosophy is greater th^ ^ hlcssing 

gods (by just so much as a go°A pliilosophy 

dian, simply, life) had it not been f 

l6l 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 


xc,r 


itself was something bestowed by the gods. They have given , 
no one the present of a knowledge of philosophy, but every-, 
one the means of acquiring it. For if they had made philosopHy 
a blessing given to all and sundry, if we were bom in a state 
of moral enlightenment, wisdom would have been deprived 
of the best thing about her — that she isn’t one of the things 
which fortune either gives us or doesn’t. As things are, there, 
is about wisdom a nobility and magnificence in the fact that 
she doesn’t just fall to a person’s lot, that each man owes her 
to his own efforts, that one doesn’t go to anyone other than 
oneself to find her. What would you have worth looking up 
to in philosophy if she were handed out free ? 

Philosophy has the single task of discovering the truth 
about the divine and human worlds. The rehgious conscience, 
the sense of duty, justice and all the rest of the close-knit, 
interdependent ‘compariy of virtues’, never leave her side. 
Philosophy has taught men to worship what is divine, to 
love what is human, telling us that with the gods belongs 
authority, and among human beings fellowship. That fellow- 
ship lasted for a long time intact, before men’s greed broke 
society up - and impoverished even those she had brougbt 
most riches; for people cease to possess everything as soon as 
they want everything for themselves. 

The first men on this earth, however, and their immediate 
descendants, followed nature imspoiled; they took a single 
person as their leader and their law, . freely submitting to the 
decisions of an individual of superior merit. It is nature s 
way to subordinate the worse to the better. With dum 
animals, indeed, the ones who dominate the group are either 
the biggest or the fiercest. The bull who leads the herd is not 
the weakling, but the one whose bulk and brawn has broug t 
it victory over the other males. In a herd of elephants e 
tallest is the leader. Among human beings the highest ment 
the highest position. So they used to choose their r er 

162 


means 



LETTER XC 

for his character. Hence peoples were supremely fortimate 
w en among them a man could never be more powerful than , 
0 ers unless he was a better man than tliey were. For there is 
nothing dangerous in a man’s having as much power as he 
^ os if he takes the view that he has power to do only what 
n IS his duty to do. 

^go, then, which people commonly refer to as the 
olden Age, government, so Posidonius maintains, was in 
0 hands of the wise. They kept tlie peace, protected the 
w^er firom the stronger, urged and dissuaded, pointed out 
^ at was advantageous and what was not. Their ability to ' 
ook ^ead ensured that their peoples never went short of 
^ything, whilst their bravery averted dang ers and tlieir 
ovotedness brought well-being and prosperity to their 
Objects. To govern was to serve, not to rule. No one used to 
^ out the extent of his power over those to whom he owed 
mat power in the first place. And no one had either reason or 
^clination- to perpetrate injustice, since people governing 
Well were equally well obeyed, and a king could issue no 
greater threat to disobedient subjects than that of his own 
abdication. 


But with the gradual infiltration of the vices and the 
esultant transformation of kingships into tyrannies, the need 
rose for laws, laws which were themselves, to begin with, 
Rafted by the wise. Solon, who established Athens as a 
lemocratic state, was one of the seven men of antiquity 
elebrated for their wisdom. If the same age had produced 
-ycurgus, an eighth nam e would have been added to that 
evered number. The laws of Zaleucus and Charondas are 
till admired. And it was not in public life or in the, chambers 
>f lawyers that these two men learnt the constitutional 
irinciples which they were to establish in Sicily (theii in its 
leyday) and throughout the Greek areas of Italy, but in the 
ecret retreat, now hallowed and famous, of Pythagoras. 


163 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XC,7 

Thus far I agree with Posidonius. But that philosopliy 
discovered the techniques employed in everydsy life, that 
I refuse to admit. I will not claim for philosophy a fame that 
belongs to teclmology. ‘It was philosophy/ says Posidonius, 
that taught men how to raise buildings at a time when they 
were widely dispersed and their shelter consisted of huts or 
burrowed-out cliffs or hollowed tree trunks.’ I for my 
cannot believe that philosophy was responsible for the inven- 
tion of these modem feats of engineering that rise up storey 
after storey, or the cities of today crowding one against the 
next, any more than of our fish-tanks, those enclosures 
designed to save men’s gluttony from having to run the risk 
of storms and to ensure extravagance safe harbours of her 
own, however wildly the high seas may be raging, in which to 
fatten separately the different kinds of fish. Are you really 
going to tell me that philosophy taught the world to use keys 
and bolts on doors - which was surely nothing but a signal 
for greed? Was it philosophy that reared the towering build- 
ings we know today, with all the danger they mean to the 
people Hving in them? It was not enough, presumably, fot 
man to avail himself of whatever cover came to hand, to have 
found a shelter of some kind or other in nature without 
trouble and without the use of skills. Believe me, that age 
before there ever existed architects or builders was a happy 
age.- The squaring off of timbers, the accurate cutting of i 
beams with a saw that travels along a marked out line, all ^ 
these things came in with extravagance. " 

The first of men with wedges split their wood.* 

Yes, for they were not preparing a roof for a future banquet- y 
ing-haU; and pines or firs were not continually being drawn ' 
through streets trembling at their passage on a long convoy 

'N 

* Virgil, GeorgicSj 1: 144. 

164 ■ . 



LETTER XC 

of vehicles to support panelled ceilings lieavy with gold. 
Their huts were held up by a forked pole stood at cidier end, 
and with close-packed brandies and a sloping pile of leaves a 
tun-off was arranged for even heav)’^ rains. This was the kind 
of roof under which they lived and yet tlicir lives were free 
of care. For men in a state of freedom had thatch for tlieir 
shelter, while slavery dwells beneath marble and gold. 

Another matter on which I disagree with Posidonius is 
his belief that it was by wise men tliat tools were originally 
invented. On that sort of basis there is nothing to stop him 
saying that it was by philosophers that 

Discovered next were ways of snaring game. 

Of catching birds with lime, of setting dogs 
All round deep woods.* 


k was human ingenuity, not wisdom, which discovered all 
diat. I disagree with him again where he maintains that it 
u^as wise men who discovered iron and copper mining (when 
the earth had been scorched by a forest fire and had melted to 
produce a flow from surface veins of ore). The person who 
discovers that sort of thing is the kind of person who makes it 
Ids business to be interested in just tbat sort of thing. 
that matter, do I find it as nice a question as Posidonius does, 
whether the hammer started to come into general use before, 
the tongs or the other way round. They were o invente 
hy some individual of an alert, perceptive turn o .mm , 
hut not one with the qualities of greamess or of mspiranom 
And the same applies to anything else the quest of which 

involves a bent hack and an earthward gaze. 

The wise man then Mowed . simple way of hfe - which 
is haray surprising when you connder how even m ths 
modem age he seeks to be as little eneumbered as he possibly 

* Virgil, Georgies, I:i3t)-40. 

165 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XC, 14 

can. How, I ask you, can you consistently admire both Daeda- 
lus and Diogenes? Tell me which of these two you would say 
was a wise man, the one who hit on the saw, or the one who on 
seeing a boy drinking water from the hollow of his hand, 
immediately took the cup out of his knapsack and smashed 
it, telling himself off for his stupidity in having superfluous 
luggage about him all that time, and curled himself up in a 
jar^® and went to sleep. And today just tell me which of the 
following you consider the wiser man: the one who dis- 
covers a means of spraying saffron perfumes to a tremendous 
height from hidden pipes, who fills or empties channels in 
one sudden rush of water, who constructs a.' set of inter- 
changeable ceilings for a dining room in such a way as to 
produce a constant succession of different patterns, with a 
change of ceiling at each course? Or the one who proves to 
others and to himself that nature makes no demand on us 
that is difSaflt or hard to meet and that we can Hve without 
the marble-worker and the engineer, that we can clothe 
ourselves without importing silks, that we. can have the 
things we need for oxir ordinary purposes if we will only be 
content with what the earth has made available on its sur- 
face. If they only cared to listen to this man, tKe human race 
would realize that cooks are as unnecessary to them as are 
soldiers. 

That race of men to whom taking care of the body was a 
straightforward enough matter were, if not philosophers, 
something very like it. The things that are essential are acquired 
with little bother; it is the luxuries that call for toil and 
effort. FoUow nature and you will feel no need of craftsmen. 

It was nature’s desire that we should not be kept occupied 
thus. She equipped us for everything she required m to 
contend with. ‘But the naked body can’t stand cold. So 
what? Are the skins of wild beasts and other creatures not 
capable of giving us more than adequate protection against 

j66 



XC, 18 


LETTER XC 

Ae cold? Is it not a fact that many peoples make a covering 
or their bodies out of bark, that feathers are sewn together 
to serve as clothing, that even today the majority of tlie 
S^^thians wear the pelts of fox and mice, which are soft to 
e touch and impervious to wind? Are you going to tell me 
too that any people you care to mention never used their 
ands to weave a basketwork of wattles, smear it all over with 
common mud and tlien cover the whole roof with long grass- 
stems and other material growing wild, and went through 
■wmter weather, the rains streaming down the slopes of the 
roof, without any worry? ‘But we need some pretty dense 
s ade to keep off the heat of the sun in summer/ So what? 
Have past ages not left us plenty of hiding places that have 
een carved out by the ravages of time, or whatever otlier 
cause one cares to suppose, and have developed into caves? 
•Aud again, is it not a fact that Syrtian tribes take shelter in 
pits dug in the ground, as do other people who, because of 
extreme sun temperatures, find nothing less than the baked 
earth itself sufficiently substantial as a protective covering 
against the heat? When nature granted all the other animals 
a simple passage through life, she was not so unfair to man as 
to make it impossible for him, for him alone, to live without 
all these skills. Nature demanded nothing hard from us, and 
nothing needs painful contriving to enable life to be kept 
gomg. We 'were bom into a world in which things were 
ready to our hands; it is we who have made everything 
difficult to come by through our own disdain for what is 
easily come by. Shelter and apparel and the means of warming 
body and food, all the things which nowadays entail tremen- 
dous trouble, were there for the taking, free to all, obtainable 
. at trifling effort. With everything the limit corresponded to 
the need. It is we, and no one else, who have made diose same 
things costly, spectacular and obtainable only by means of a 
large number of full-scale techniques. 

167 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XC 

Nature suffices for all she asks of us. Luxury has tun 
her back on nature, daily urging herself on and growi 
■through all the centuries, pressing men’s intelligence into i 
development of the vices. First she began to hanker af 
things that were inessential, and then after things that w< 
injurious, and jSnally she handed the mind over to the boi 
and commanded it to be the out and out slave of the bod] 
whim and pleasure. All those trades that give rise to noise 
hectic activity in the city are in business for the body, whii 
was once in the position of the slave, having every thh 
issued to it, and is now the master, having everything pn 
cured for it. This is the starting point for textile and enginee 
ing workshops, for the perfumes used by chefs, the sensu 
movements of our dancing teachers, even sensual and ur 
manly songs. And why? Because the bounds of natun 
which set a limit to man’s wants by relieving them onl 
where there is necessity for such relief, have been lost sight ol 
to want simply what is enough nowadays suggests to peopi 
primitiveness and squalor. 

It is incredible, Lucilius, how easily even great men can bi 
carried away from the truth by the sheer pleasure of holding 
forth on a subject. Look at Posidonius, in my opinion onf 
of those who have contributed most to philosophy, when ht 
wants to give a description of how, in the first place, some 
threads are twisted and others drawn out from the soft, loose 
hank of wool, then how the warp has its threads stretched 
perpendicularly by means of hanging weights, and hoW 
the weft (worked in to soften the hard texture of the warp 
threads which compress it on either side) is made compact 
and close by means of the batten; he declares that philosophers 
invented the art of the weaver too, forgetting that philosophers 
had disappeared by the time tlu's comparatively advanced 
type of weaving in which 


i68 ■ 


xc, 23 


LETTER XC 


The warp is bound to die beam, and then its direads 
Are parted by the reed, the woof worked in 
Between widi pointed shuttles and pressed home 
By the broad comb’s fretted teeth* 

tad been evolved. He might have thought differently if he 
had only had the opportunity of seeing the looms of the 
present day, the end product of which is clothing wliich is 
not gomg to conceal a thing, clothing which is no help to 
ntodesty let alone thc’body ! He then goes on to farmers, and 
gives an equally eloquent description of how die soil is 
broken up by the plough for the first time and then gone over 
^gain in order diat the earth, thus loosened, may allow the 
roots more room to develop, and continues with the sowing 
of the seed and the lifting of the weeds to prevent any stray 
^d plants springing up and ruining the crop. All this, too, 
he represents as being the work of philosophers, as if agricul- 
Were not, now as ever, discovering plenty of new 
methods of increasing the soil’s productivity. 

Not content with these occupations, he proceeds to de- 
mean the philosopher to the bakery; he tells us how by imitat- 
mg nature he began producing bread. ‘The grain, he says, 
« t^en into the mouth and crushed by the coming together 
° die hard surfaces of the teeth; anything that escapes is 
?^^^d back to the teeth again by the tongue, and the grain 
r mixed with saliva to enable it to pass down ■ the 

throat widi greater facility ; on reaching the stomach, 
^ ere it is cooked in an even heat, it is finally absorbed into 
e system. Taking this process as a model, someone or other. 
P aced one rough stone on top of another in imitation of the 
, one set of which remains immobile and awaits the 
action ofthe other; the grains are then crushed by the friction 
^ die one against the other, and are constantly re-subjected 




Ovid, Metamorphoses, VI 155 (apparently misquoted). 
169 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XC ,23 

to it until they are reduced by this repeated grinding to a fine 
powder. He’ then sprinkled the resulting meal with water, 
and by going on manipulating it he made it plastic, and shaped 
it into the form of a loaf. This he first baked in a glowing hot 
earthenware vessel in hot ashes; later came the gradual 
discovery of ovens and other devices the heat of which is 
controllable at will.’ Posidonius was not far off maintain- 
ing that the shoemaker’s trade as well was invented by philo- 
sophers I • . 

Now all these things were indeed discovered by the exer- 
cise of reason, but not by reason in its perfect form. They 
were invented by ordinary men, not by philosophers - just 
as, let me add, were the vessels we cross rivers and seas m, 
with sails designed to catch the drive of the winds and rud- 
ders at the stem to alter the vessel’s course in this or that 
direction (the idea being taken from the fish, who steers with 
his tail, one slight movement of it to either side being enougn 
to alter the direction of his darting course). ‘AH these things, 
says Pondonius, ‘were invented by our philosopher. They 
were, however, rather too unimportant for him to handle 
personally, and so he passed them over to the minions among 
his assistants.’ No, the fact is that this sort of thing was not 
thought up by anyone other than the people who make them 
then: concern today. We know very well that some have only 
appeared within living memory, the use, for example, of 
windows letting in the full daylight through transparent 
panes, or bathrooms heated from beneath with pipes set in 
the walls in order to difiuse the heat and thus maintain an 
even temperature at the highest as well as the lowest room 
levels. Need I mention the marble with which our templ^ 
and even houses are resplendent? Or the rounded and pohshed 
blocks on which we rest whole colonnades and building 
capable of holding large crowds of people? Or the shorthm 
symbols by means of which even a rapidly delivered speech is 

170 



xc,3i 


LETTER XC 


taken down and the hand is able to keep up with the quickness 
of the tongue? These are inventions of the lowest slaves. 
Philosophy is far above all this; she does not train men’s 
kands: she is the instructress of men’s minds. 

You want to know, do you, what philosophy has imearthed, 
what philosophy has achieved? It is not the gracefulness of ' 
^ce movements, nor the variety of sounds produced by 
horn or flute as they take in breath and transform it, in its 
passage through or out of the instrument, into notes. She does 
^ot set about constructing arms or walls or anything of use 
^ War. On the contrary, her voice is for peace, calling all 
mankind to live in harmony. And she is not, I insist, the 
^^'^^^^turer of equipment for everyday essential purposes. 

y must you make her responsible for such insignificant 
^ lugs? In fler you see the mistress of the art of life itself. 

c has, indeed, authority over other arts, inasmuch as all 
activities that provide life with its apparatus must also be the 
Servants of that of which life itself is the servant. Philosophy, 
oweyer, takes ^ her aim the state of happiness. That is the 
u^ection in which she opens routes and guides us. She shows 
m what are real and what are only apparent evils. She strips 
mens minds of empty thinking, bestows a greatness that is 
solid and administers a check to. greatness where it is puffed 
jP ^ mi empty show; she sees that we are left in no 
oo t about the difference between what is great and what is 
®med. And she imparts a knowledge of the whole of nature, 
^Well as of herself. She explains what the gods are, and what 
^ey are like... * ■ 

.^^'^karsis,’ says Posidonius, ‘discovered the potter’s 
“Oel. the rotarv mr.t;r,n of which shapes earthenware.’ 


fhen. 


mention of the potter’s wheel being found in Homer, 


3°« in\whicli Seneca appears to claim for 
Sophy complete and certain knowledge of the truth in religious 

cosmological matters) have been omitted. 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XC,3i 

he would have us thmk that it is the passage in Homer, 
rather than his story, that is spurious. I maintain that Anachar- 
sis was not responsible for this invention, and that even if he 
was, he discovered it as a philosopher, yes, but not in his 
capacity as a philosopher, in the same way as philosophers do 
plenty of things as men without doing them in their capacity 
as philosophers. Suppose, for example, a philosopher happens 
to be a very fast runner; in a race he will come fost by virtue 
of his ability as a runner, not by virtue of his being a philo- 
sopher. I should like to show Posidonius some glass-blower 
moulding glass by means of his breath into a whole variety 
of shapes that could hardly be fashioned by the most careful 
hand - discoveries that have occurred in the period since the 
disappearance of the wise man. ‘Democritus,’ he says, is 
reported to be the discoverer of the arch, the idea of which 
is to bind a curving line of stones, set at slightly differing 
angles from each other, with a keystone.’ This I should say 
was quite untrue. For there must have been both bridges and 
gateways before Democritus’ time, and the upper parts of 
these generally have a ourve to them. And it seems to have 
escaped your memory, Posidonius, that this same Democritus 
discovered a means of softening ivory, and a means of tummg 
a pebble into an ‘emerald’ by boiling it, a method employed 
even today for colouring certain stones that man has dis- 
covered and found amenable to the process. These tech- 
niques may indeed have been discovered by a philosopher, 
but not in his capacity as a philosopher. For there are plenty 
of things which he does which one sees being done just as 
well if not with greater skill and dexterity by persons totally 
lacking in wisdom. 

What has the philosopher investigated? What has the 
philosopher brought to light? In the first place, truth and 
nature {having, unlike the rest of the animal world, followed 
nature with more than just a pair of eyes, things slow to 

17a 



xc. 37 


LETTER XC 


grasp divinity) ; and secondly, a rule of life, in which he has 
brought life into line with things imiversal. And he has 
taught us not just to recognize but to obey tlie gods, and to 
accept all that happens exactly as if it were an order from 
above. He has told us not to listen to false opinions, and has 
■weighed and valued everything against standards which are 
true. He has condemned pleasures an inseparable element of 
wHch is subsequent regret, has commended the good things 
which -wUl always satisfy, and for all to see has made the 
uian who has no need of luck the luckiest man of all, and the 
ruan who is master of himself the master of all. 

The philosophy I speak of is not the one* which takes the 
otizen out of pubhc life and the gods out of the world we 
in> and hands morality over to pleasure, but the philo- 
sophy which thinks nothing good unless it is honourable, 
^ rch is incapable of being enticed astray by the rewards of 
®cn or fortune, and the very pricelessness of which lies in 
0 act that it cannot be bought at any price. And I do not 
^ icve that this philosophy was in existence in that primitive 
ora in which technical skills were stiU unknown and useful 
owledge was acquired through actual practical experience, 
th ^ happy, an age in which • 

ounties of nature were freely available for the use of 
without discrimination, before avarice and luxury split 
uui^ hemgs up and got them to abandon partnership for 
^ uer. The men of that era were not philosophers, even if 
^ philosophers are supposed to act.j' No other 
of man could cause anyone greater admiration; if God 
ere to allow a man to fashion the things of this earth and allot 
Widi^^ customs, that man would not be satisfied 

^y other system than the .one which tradition says 
in those people’s time, among whom 

* Epicureanism. 

i" i.e. ‘in accordance with nature’. 


173 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 


xc ,37 


No farmers tilled ploughed fields; merely to mark 
The line of boundaries dividing land 
Between its owners was a sin; men shared 
Their findings, and the earth herself then gave 
All things more freely unsolidted.* 

What race of men could be luckier? Share and share alike 
they eryoyed nature. She saw to each and every mans 
requirements for survival like a parent. What it all amounted 
to was undisturbed possession of resources owned by the 
community. I can surely call that race of men one of un- 
paralleled riches, it being impossible to find a single pauper 
ink. 

Into this ideal state of things burst avarice, avarice which in 
seeking to put aside some article or other and appropriate it 
to its own use, only succeeded in making everything some- 
body else’s property and reducing its possessions to a fraction 
of its previously unlimited wealth. Avarice brought m 
poverty, by coveting a lot of possessions losing all that it had. 
This is why although it may endeavour to make good its 
losses, may acquire estate after estate by buying out or 
forcing out its neighbours, enlarge coimtry properties to the 
dimensions of whole provinces, speak of ‘owning some 
property’ when it can go on a long tour overseas without once 
stepping off its own land, there is no extension of our 
boundaries that can bring us back to our starting point. 
When we have done everything within our power, we shall 
possess a great deal : but we once possessed the world. 

The earth herself, untilled, was more productive, her 
yields being more than ample for the needs of peoples who 
did not raid each other. With any of nature’s products, men 
foimd as much pleasure in showing others what they had dis- 
covered as they did in discovering it. No one could outdo or 

* Virgil, Georgies, 1 : 125-8. 

174 



^^^43 LETTER XC 

be outdone by any other. All was equally divided among 
people living in complete harmony. The stronger had not 
yet started la^dng hands on die. weaker; the avaricious person 
bad not yet started hiding things away, to be hoarded for his 
otvn private use, so shutting die next man off from actual 
necessities of life; each eared as much about the other as 
about himself. Weapons were unused; hands still unstained 
vith human blood had directed dicir hostility exclusively 
against wild beasts. 

Protected from die sun in some thick wood, living in 
some very ordinar)' shelter under a covering of leaves pre- 
serving them from die rigom-s of winter or the rain, diose 
people passed tranquil nights with never a sigh. We in our 
^^’^on luxury toss and turn with worr}% stabbed by needling 
^es. ■’^at soft sleep the hard earth gave diose people I 
, carved or panelled ceilings hanging over 

abo^* in the open, with die stars slipping past 

that ^ firmament silently convc)ang onward 

at mighty work of creation as it was carried headlong 

s^'a a in the magnificent pageant of the night 

d they had clear views by day as well as by night of 
con mansions, enjoying the pleasure of watching 

• falling away from the zenith and others rising 

joy^ °f sight beneath die horizon. Surely it was a 

^ound earth with marvels scattered so widely 

your h by contrast, go pale at every noise 

awav ”^^e, and if there is a crealdng sound you run 
your frescoed passages in alarm. Those people 
die scale of towns. Fresh air and the 
^hade of^ i^mezes of the open spaces, the unoppressive 
"^hich rock, springs of crystal clarity, streams 

'^'^ork of course, streams unsullied by the 

^tural pip^s or any other interference with their 

^^“annels, meadows whose beauty owed nothing to 


175 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XC,43 

man’s art, that was the environment around their dwelling 
places in the countryside, dwelling places given a simple 
countryman’s finish. This was a home in conformity with 
nature, a home in which one enjoyed living, and which 
occasioned neither fear of it nor fears for it, whereas nowa- 
days our own homes count for a large part of our feeling 
of insecurity. 

But however wonderful and guileless the life they led, 
they were not wise men; this is a title that has come to be 
reserved for the highest of all achievements. All the same, I 
should he the last to‘ deny that they were men of exalted 
spirit, only one step removed, so to speak, from the gods. 
There can be no doubt that before this earth was worn out it 
produced a better type of offspring. But though they all 
possessed a character more robust than that of today, and 
one with a greater aptitude for hard work, it is equally true 
that their, personalities fell short of genuine perfection. For 
nature does not give a man virtue: the process of becoming a 
good man is an art. Certainly they did not go in search of 
gold or silver or the various crystalline stones to be found in 
the nethermost dregs of the earth. They were still merciful 
even to dumb animals. Man was far and away from killing 
man, not out of fear or provocation, but simply for entertain- 
ment. They had yet to wear embroidered clothing, and had 
yet to have gold woven into robes, ^or even mine it. But the 
fact remains that their innocence was due to ignorance and 
nothing else. And there is a world of difference between, on 
the one hand, choosing not to do what is wrong and, on the 
other, not knowing how to do it in the first place. They 
lacked the cardinal virtues of justice, moral insight, self- 
control and courage. There were . corresponding qualities, 
in each case not unlike these, that had a place in their primi- 
tive lives; but virtue only comes to a character which has been 
thoroughly schooled and trained and brought to a pitch of 

176 



xa,2 LETTEH XCI 

perfection by unremitting practice. We are bom ^ I ^ 
not with it. And even in the best of people, unti yo 
it there is only the material for virtue, not virtue itse 


LETTER XCI 

My friend Liberalis is in some distress at the v 

following the news of the complete destruction o 

fire. It is a disaster by which anyone mig t e s ’ 

alone a person quite devoted to his home town. 

has left him groping for that staunchness o spir ^ . 

nature enough; he cultivated when it was a case ^ang 

what to him were conceivable fears. One is no p ^ 

diough, that there were never any advance 

™4eaea, ' 

that there was no precedent for it. ,-1 .. 

suffered damage by fire, but none h^ ever enemy 

one. Even when its buildings have been set i/they are 

hands, in many places the flames c^ie out, a-d ^vm^ey 

continually rekindled they 3xe A^puakes, too, have 

leave nothing for tools to ^ to raze whole 

hardly ever been so rumom m destructive as to 

towns. There has never in fact bee consume. But here a 

leave nothing for ^ _r aj-chitectural splendours 

single nighs h. 1^4 ^ glory of , a .pa«.o 

any one of which mignt na ^ ^ 

dry. h dre depth of Pf “ "if. would 

could not have been drea conflict is in abeyance 

believe it? At a time covers all parts of 

everywhere whm ^ of Gaul, is lost to view. 

*e glohe, Lyom, ^ she strikes down in 

Fortune mvariabiy anu 


177 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC xa,z 

the sight of all a chance to fear what they were going to 
suffer. The fall of anything great generally takes time. But 
here a single night is all there was between a mighty city 
and no city at all. It was destroyed in fact in less time than I 
have taken telling you ofits destruction. 

Stordy and resolute though he is when it comes to facing 
his own troubles, our Liberalis has been deeply shocked by 
the whole thing. And he has some reason to be shaken. What 
is quite unlooked for is more crushing in its effect, and 
unexpectedness adds to the weight of a disaster. Ihe fact 
that it was unforeseen has never failed to intensify a person s 
grief. This is a reason for ensuring that nothing ever takes 
us by surprise. We should project our thoughts ahead of us 
at every turn and have in mind every possible eventuahty 
instead of only the usual course of events. For what is there 
that fortune does not when she pleases fell at the height of 
its powers? What is there that is not the more assailed and 
buffeted by her the more lustrous its attraction? What is 
there that is troublesome or difficult for her? Her assaults do 
not always come along a single path, or even a well-recognized 
path. At one time she will call in the aid of our own hands in 
attacking us-, at another, she will be content with her own 
powers in devising for us dangers for which no one is rC" 
sponsible. No moment is exempt: in the midst of pleasures 
there are found the springs of suffering. In the middle or 
peace war rears its head, and the bulwarks of one’s secunty 
are transformed into sources of alarm, friend turning fos 
and ally turning enemy. The summer’s calm is upset by 
sudden storms more severe than those of winter, j&i the absence 
of any enemy we suffer all that an enemy might wreak on us. 
Overmuch prosperity if aU else fails will hit on the instni- 
ments of its own destruction. Sickness assails those leading 
the most sensible lives, tuberculosis those with the strong^t 
constitutions, retribution the utterly guiltless, violence o 

178 



xa,8 


LETTER XCI 


dost secluded. Misfortune has a way of choosing some un- 
precedented means or other of impressing its power on those 
yp'lio might he said to have forgotten it. A single day strews 
hr ruins all that was raised by a train of construction extend- 
hrg over a long span of time and involving a great number 
of separate works and a great deal of favour on the part 
of heaven. To say a 'day’, indeed, is to put too much of 
^ brake on the calamities that hasten down upon us: an 
hour, an instant of time, suffices for the overthrow of 
empires. It would be some relief to our condition and our 
frailty if all things were as slow in their perishing as tlrey 
^ore in their coming into being: but as it is, the grow^ 
of things is a tardy process and their undoing is a rapid 
matter. 


blothing is durable, whether for an individual or for a 
Society; the destinies of men and cities alike sweep onwar^. 
Terror strikes amid the most tranquil surroundings, and with- 
out any disturbance in the background to give rise to them 
oalamities spring from the least expected quarter. States 
which stood firm through civil war as well as wars external 
coUapse without a hand being raised against them. How ew 
uations have made of their prosperity a lasting thing ! T is is 
^by we need to envisage every possibility and to strengt en 
die spirit to deal with the things which may conceivab y come 
ubout. Rehearse them in your mind: exile, torture, war, p 
^eck. Misfortune may snatch you away from your country. 
Or your country away from you, may banish you into some 
wilderness - these very surroundings in whic e inasses 
mffocate may become a wilderness. All ^ 
human lot should be before oiir eyes; we should be untmipat- 
big not merely all that commonly happens u , 

conceivably capable of happening, if we do not wmt to he 
ovenvM Jed Li struck auib by rare 

unprecedented ones; fortune needs envisagmg m a thoroug y 


179 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC XCi,8 

comprehensive way. Think how often towns in Asia or in 
Greece have fallen at a single earth tremor, how many villages 
in Syria or Macedonia have been engulfed, how often this 
form of disaster has wrought devastation in Cyprus, how 
often Paphos has tumbled about itself! Time and again we 
hear the news of the annihilation of a whole city, and how 
small a fraction of mankind are we who hear such news thus 
often ! So let us face up to the blows of circumstance and he 
aware that whatever happens is never as serious as rumour 
makes it out to be. 

So a city has burned, a wealthy city and the glory of the 
provinces of which it was a feature though it stood in a 
class of its own, perched as it w^as on a single hill and that not 
a hill of very great dimensions. But time sweep away the 

very traces of every one of those cities of whose splendour 
and magnificence you nowadays hear. Look at the way the 
very foundations of once famous cities of Greece have been 
eroded by now to the point where nothing is left to show 
that they ever even existed. And it is not only the works of 
human hands that waste away, nor only structures raised h/ 
human skill and industry that the passing days demolish. 
Mountain massifs crumble away, whole regions have sub- 
sided, the waves have covered landmarks once far out ot 
sight of the sea. The immense force of volcanic fires that once 
made the mountain-tops glow has eaten them away and 
reduced to lowly stattire what once were soaring peaks, 
reassuring beacons to the mariner. The works of nature 
herself suffer. So it is only right that we should bear the over- 
throw of cities with resignation. They stand just to fan* 
Such is the sum total of the end that awaits them, whedwr 
it be the blast of a subterranean explosion throwing off the 
restraining weight above it, or the violence of floodwaters 
increasing to a prodigious degree underground tmril it 
breaks dovm everything in its way, or a volcamc outburst 

i8o 



xa,is LETTER XCI 

fracturing tlie eartii’s crust, or age (to wliicli notliing is 
ifflinune) overcoming them little by little, or p ague carry 
ing off its population and causing the deserted area to 
It would be tedious to recount all the different ^ ^ r 

fate may overtake them. One thing I know: ^ ® 

mortal man lie under sentence of mortality , we ve am 
things that are destined to perish. i • n t 

Such, then, are the comforting reflections w ic w 
offer our Liberalis, who bums with a kind of passion 
belief for his birthplace - which it may . 

consumed so as to be called to higher things. set 
often cleared the way for greater 

have fallen only to rise to more exalted heights. ^ 

of affluence in the capital, Timagenes, used to , 

the one reason fires distressed him was the ^ ^ndard 
tvhat would rise up afterwards would be of a etter s 
than what had burned. In the city of Lyons, too, 
presume that everyone will endeavour to make e 
restoration a greater, more noble achievement to ^ 
they have lost. May that work ampices 

may the new foundation he attended by all time! 

a view to itt lasring for a long« being, 

This IS the hundredth year since the o 
and even for a human being such an g toncen- 

nttermost limit. Founded by Plancus m situa- 

tratcd population, it owes its grow o suffer in 

bon: yet how many grievous blows i 

the time it takes for a man to grow and an accept- 

So the spirit must he trained t . nothing fortune 

ance ofitslot.lt must come to sec tna autliority over, 

^vill shrink from, that she wic s power over cities as 

emperor and empire ^ihe and tic^^ resentment in all this. 

over men. There’s no gt®^ , . , ^ arc tlic terms life 
YVc’vc entered into a world m 

l8l 


letters from a stoic xa,is 

tuvf not'57°“’"" 'f to A™- if 

™ufjL ”T 1" ” ^justice decreed against 

TwirT^i!^? - "4 on 

fell. ^ 

mem. t graves and all the variety of monu- 

stature In th^ ^ highways as a measure of our 

e. In the ashes all men are levelled. We re bom imequal, 

we die equal. And my words apply as much to cities as to 

'XI was Rome. 

' ^wpver draws no distinctions between us accord- 

g o our I or the celebrity of our names, save only while 
we exist.^ On the reaching of mortality’s end he declares, 
way wi snobbery ; dl that the earth carries shall forthwid 
c su ject to one law without discrimination.’ When it come 
o we re required to go through, we’re equals. No one is 
ore \^erable than the next man, and no one can be more 
sure of his surviving to the morrow. 

King Alexander of Macedon once took up the study of 
geometry — poor fellow, inasmuch as he would thus find out 
how minute the earth reaUy was,, the earth of which he had 
possessed himself of a tiny part; yes, ‘poor fellow’ I call him, 
or e reason that he was bound to discover that his title 
was a false one; for who can be ‘Great’ in an area of minute 
dimensions? Anyway, the points he was being instructed in 
were ctf some subtlety and such that the learning of them 
demanded the closest concentration,- not the sort of thing 
that would be grasped by a crazed individual projecting his 
thought across the seas. ‘Teach me,’ he said, ‘the easy things/ 
to which his instractor answered, ‘These things are the same 
for everyone, equally difficult for all.’ Well, imagine that 
nature is saying to you, ‘Those things you gmmble about are 
the same for everyone. I can give no one anything easier. 

182 



xa,2i 


LETTER XCI 

But anyone who likes may make them easier for himself. 
How? By viewing them with equanimity . 

You must needs experience pain and hunger and tmrst, 
3ud grow old (assuming that you are vouchsafed a relative y 
long stay among men) and he ill, and suffer loss, and final y 
perish. But you needn’t believe the chatter of the peop e 
around you; there’s nothing in all this that’s evil, insupport- 
ahle or even hard. Those people are afraid of these things y s- 
Hnd of general consent. Are you going to feel alarm at dea , 
^en, in the same way as you might at some common report, 
^at could be more foolish than a man s being afiai o 
people’s words? My friend Demetrius has a nice way of 
putting things when he says, as he commonly does, that to 
ui the utterances of the rmenlightened are as noises eman^ 
horn the belly. ‘What difference does it make to me, he 
whether their rumblings come from their upper or 

tBeir nether regions?’ , , 

^^at utter foolishness it is to he afraid that those w o ave 
^ had name can rob you of a good one. Just as t c re 
Roused in you by some common report has prove 
css, so too is the dread of things of which you wo 
c afraid if common report did not tell you to e. 
atm could ever come to a good man from being esmir 
hy unwarranted gossip? We shouldn’t even let it 

against death, which itself has an evil reputation. Yet 
® the people who malign it has put it to the test. ^ i • 
ocs it s rather rash to condemn a thing one 
® out. And yet one thing you do know and J from 

^any people it’s a blessing to, how many has 

turc, want, maladies, suffering, wearine 
power over us when death is within our own pov. e . 


183 



•CIV,I 


LETTER CIV 


1 HAVE got away to my place at Nomentum - getting away 
from what? Guess. The city? No, a fever. And just as it was 
infiltrating my defences, too. It had already taken a hold on 
me, my doctor being decided in his opinion that a disturbed, 
irregular pulse, its natural rhythm upset, was the start of it. 
Whereupon I immediately ordered my carriage out, and 
although my Paulina tried to hold me hack, insisted on driv- 
ing away. I kept saying the same thing as my mentor Gallic 
when he started sickening for a fever in Achaea. He immedi- 
ately boarded a ship, assuring everyone that the disorder was 
to be put down to the place where he was living and not to 
his constitution. 

I told Paulina this. She is forever urging me to take care of 
my health; and indeed as I come to realize the way her very 
being depends on mine, I am beginning, in my concern for 
her, to feel some concern for myself. So although old age 
has made me better at putting up with a lot of things, here I 
am coming to lose this advantage of being old. The notion 
occurs to me that inside this old Aame there exists ayoimg man 
as well and one is always less severe on a young man. The conse- 
quence is that since I haven’t managed to get her to put a 
little more bravery into her love for me, she has managed to 
induce me to show a little more love and care for myself. 


For concessions have to be made to legitimate emotions. 
There are times when, however pressing one’s reasons to the 
contrary, one’s dying breath requires to be summoned hacK 
and held back even as it is passing, one’s Bps, even if this 
amounts to torture, simply out of consideration for ones 
dear ones. The good man should go on living as long as he 
ought to, not just as long as he likes. The man who does not 


184 



CW.6 LETTER CIV 

value Ms wife or a friend higlily enough to stay on a little 
longer in life, who persists in dying in spite of is a 

tKoroughly self-indulgent character. This is a duty ^ ^ ^ 
soul should also impose on itself when it is mere Y ^ ^ 
venience of near and dear ones that demands it. And not on y 
if and when it feels the wish to die, hut also if an ^ 

Has begun to carry out the wish, it should pause aw e to 

htinwith their interests. ' . r W 

To return to life for another’s sake is a sign o a no e 
spirit; it is something that great men have done on a 

of occasions. Yet to give your old age greater care an atten 

tiveness in the realization that this pleases any o 
closest to you, or is in their interests, or would e ^ ^ ° 
gratify them (and this in spite of the fact drat the grea e 
reward of that period is the opportumty it gives you to a op 
^relatively carefree attitude towards looking a ter yo 
^d a more adventurous manner of livitvg), is so, to 
^d, a mark of the highest possible kindness, esi 
brings you more than a little pleasure an 
^ anything be sweeter than to find that ^ . ..Qj^es 

your wife that this makes you dearer to yourse ' £^j. 

about that my Paulina succeeds in makii^ ^ 

anaety of my own as well as hers on my e a 
1 expect you’re keen m hear ^ had I 

liealtk, this decision of mine to leave. > 

left behind the oppressive a.tmosphere -^h a cloud 

teek of smoking cookers which accumulated in 

of ashes, all the poisonous J than I noticed 

their interiors whenever they re imagine how 

the change in my condition ^ _ vineyards! I fairly 

muA stronger I felt animals just turned out on 

waded into my food - talk 

to spring grass I So by no , ^ ill at ease and mentally 

feeling of listlessness, being 


LETTER CIV 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC CIV,(5 

inefficient, didn’t Jast. I’m beginning to get down to some 
whole-hearted work. 

This is not something, however, to which mere surround- 
ings are conducive, unless the mind is at its own disposal, 
able at will to provide its own seclusion even in aowded 
moments. On die contrary, the man who spends his time 
choosing one resort after another in a himt for peace and 
quiet, will in every place he visits find something to prevent 
him from relaxing. The story is told that someone com- 
plained to Socrates that travelling abroad had never done 
him any good and received the reply: ‘What else can you 
expect, seeing that you always take yourself along ‘with you 
when you go abroad?’ "What a blessing it would be for some 
people if they could only lose themselves ! As things are these 
persons are a worry and a burden, a source of demoralization 
and anxiety, to their own selves. What good does it do you to 
go overseas, to move from city to city? If you really want to 
escape the things that harass you, what you’re needing is not 
to be in a different place but to be a different person. Suppose 
you’ve arrived in Athens, or suppose it’s Rhodes - choose 
any coiuitry you like - what difference does the character of 
the place make? You’ll only be iniporting your own with 
you’. You’ll'still look on wealth as a thing to be valued: your 
poverty will be causing you torment, while (this being the 
most pathetic thing about it all) your poverty will be imagin- 
ary. However much you possess there’s someone else who has 
more, and you’ll be fancying yourself to be short of things you 
need to the exact extent to which you lag behind him. 
Another thing that you’ll regard as something to be valued is 
success in public life; in which case you’re going to feel 
resentment when so-and-so is elected consul (or when 
so-and-so is re-elected for that matter), and be jealous when- 
ever you see a person’s name appearing too often in Ae 
honours-h‘sts. Your ambition wiU be running at so feverish a 

i86 



av. 12 LETTER CIV 

pitch that if anyone’s ahead of you in the race you 11 see 
yourselfas coming last. , 

Death you 11 think of as the worst of all bad things, though 
in fact there’s nothing bad about it at all except the thing 
which comes before it - the fear of it. You’ll be scared stift 
hy illusory as "weil as genuine dangers, haunted by imaginary 
alarms, ^X^at good wiU it do you to 


Have found a route past all those Argive forts ^ 

And won escape right through the enemy s lines? 

^cace itself will supply you with new fears. If your mind 
has once experienced the shocks^ of fright you 11 no otiger 
have any confidence even in things which are pertecty 
s^e; once it has acquired the habit of unthinking pamc, it 
incapable even of attending to its own self-preservation, o 
h runs away firom. dangers instead of taking steps to 
and we’re far more exposed to them once our 
turned. , , ■> 

To lose someone you love is something you U regar 
Wdest of all blows to bear, while all the time t s wi 
as crying because the leaves fall feom e eau 
^at add to the charm of your home. i you, 

proportion in your attitude to everything a p 
»a make the Lst of them «hi)e *ey 

one moment chance will ca^ leaves is not difficult 

foment another; but the fallmg of 

to bear, since they grow again, anu brightening 

the loss of those whom you love again they are 

your existence; for even if be qufte the same.’ 

replaced, ‘But their successors vvi ^ 

hjo, and neither will gj of time arc easier to 

thangc in you, althougn tlic obvious, 

^ee in otlicrs; in your own ^ 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 07, U 

because to you they do not show. While other people are 
snatched away from us, we are being filched away surrepti- 
tiously from ourselves. 

Are you never going to give any of these considerations 
any thought and never going to apply any healing treatment 
to your woimds, instead of sowing the seeds of worry for 
yourself by hoping for tliis or that, or despairing of obtaining 
this or that other thing? If you’re sensible you’ll nmthe two 
together, and never hope without an element of despair, 
never despair without an element of hope. 

What good has travel of itself ever been able to do anyone? 
It has never acted as a check on pleasure or a restraining in- 
fluence on desires; it has never controlled the temper of an 
angry man or quelled the reckless impulses of a lover; never 
in fact has it rid the personality of a fault. It has not granted 
us the gift of judgement, it has not put an end to mistaken 
attitudes. All it has ever done is distract us for a little while, 
through the novelty of our- surroundings, like children 
fascinated by sometWg they haven’t come across before. 
The instability, moreover, of a mind which is seriously un- 
well, is aggravated by it, the motion itself increasing the 
fitfulness and restlessness. This explains why people, after 
setting out for a place with the greatest of enthusiasm, are 
often more enthusiastic about getting away from it; like 
migrant birds, they fly on, away even quicker than they came. 

Travel will give you a knowledge of other countries, it 
will show you mountains whose outlines are quite new to 
you, stretches of imfamiliar plains, valleys watered by peren- | 

nial streams; it wdll allow you to observe the imique features j 
of this or that river, the way in which, for example ^ 
rises in summer flood, or the Tigris vanishes from 
at the completion of its journey through hidden subterranean : 

regions is restored to view with its volume undiminished, or • ! 
the way the Meander, theme of every poet’s early training j ! 

i88 I 



CIV. 19 LETTER CIV 

exercises, winds atout, loop after loop, and again and again 
is earned close to its own bed and tlien once more iverte 
into a different course before it can flow into its own strewn. 

But travel won t make a better or saner man of 7®^' 

^ we must spend time in smdy and in tlie writings o 
wise men, to learn the truths drat have emerged from cir 
researches, and carry on the search ourselves for the amwers 
that have not yet been discovered. This is the way to i erate 
the spirit that still needs to be rescued from its miserable state 
of slavery. 

So long, in fact, as you remain in ignorance of what to 
aim at and what to avoid, what is essential and what is super- 
fluous, what is upright or honourable conduct and w at is 
not, it will not be travelling but drifting. Ah this urrying 
horn place to place wont bring you any relief, tor you 
travelling in the company of your own emotions, o o 
hy your troubles all the way. If only they were really ' 

n^g youl They’d be farther away from you; as it is my 
not at your back, but on it I That’s why they weigh you d 
"'mth just the same uncomfortable chafing w person 

It s medicine, not a particular part of the wor , ^ 

needs if he’s Ul. Suppose someone has hro -en , ^ . 

jocated a joint; he doesn’t get into a carriage aislocation 

he calls in a doctor to have the fracture se ^g^ched or 
reduced. Well then, when a persons gan be 

oroken at so many points, do you Qf trouble 

Pnt right by a change of scenery, -.itinK? 

isntsoseriousthatitcan’tbecured by an ^ public 

Travelling doesn’t make a \ acquired merely hy 

speaker: there isn’t a single art w ^ -wisdom, then, 

being in one place rather ^ the course of taking a 

the greatest art of all, he doesn’t exist that can set 

bap? Take my word for it, temper, or fears, 

you beyond the reach of cravings. U 

i8o 





LETTERS FROM A STOIC OF, IP 

If it did, the human race would he off there in a body. So 
long as you carry the sources of your troubles about with 
you, those troubles will continue to harass and plague you 
wherever you wander on land or on sea. Does it surprise you 
that running away doesn’t do you any good? The things you’re 
running away from are with you all the time. 

What you must do, then, is mend your ways and get rid of 
the burden you’re carrying. Keep your cravings withiu safe 
limits. Scour every trace of evil feom your personality. If 
you want to enjoy your travel, you must make your travel- 
ling companion a healthy one. So long as you associate with 
a person who’s mean and grasping you wiU remain a money- 
minded individual yourself. So long as you keep arrogant 
company, just so long will conceit stick to you, Cruelty 
you’ll never say goodbye to while you share the same roof 
with a torturer. Familiarity with adulterers will only inflame 
.your desires. If you wish to be stripped of your vices you 
must get right away from the examples others set of them. 
The miser, the swindler, the bully, the cheat, who would do 
you a lot of harm by simply being near you, are actually 
inside you. Move to better company: live with the Catos, 
with Laelius, with Tubero. If you like Greek company too, 
attach yourself to Socrates and Zeno: the'^one would teach 
you how to die should it be forced upon you, the other how 
to die before it is forced upon you. Live with Chrysippus, 
live with Posidonius; they will give you a knowledge or 
T pan and the universe; they will tell you to be a practical 
philosopher: not just to entertain your listeners to a clever 
display of language, but to steel your spirit and brace it 
against whatever threatens. For the only safe harbour in this 
life’s tossing, troubled sea is to refuse to be bothere'd about 
what the future will bring and to stand ready and confident, 
squaring the breast to t^e without skulking or flinching 
whatever fortune htirls at us. 

ipo 



3V,26 letter civ 

When she created us, nature endowed us widi nohle aspira- 
tions, and just as she gave certjun animals ferocity, o icrs 
tiinidity, others cumung, so to us she gave a sphit o 
ambition, a spirit that takes us in search of a life ot, no 
greatest safety, but the greatest honour - a spirit very e 
universe, which, so far as mortal footsteps ^ 

and adopts as a model. It is self-assertive; it feels assmed o 
honour and respect; it is master of all things, it is a ove 
should accordingly give in to nothing, ^ 
it see a burden calculated to bow the shoulders ot 


man. 


Shapes frightening to the sight, Hardship and Death 


4, V w 

are not so at all if one can break through the surroim^g 
darkness and look directly at them. Many are e , 
that have caused terror during the night an een 
into matters of laughter with the coming o ay ig • 

Shapes Kglitenmg to the sight, Hatihip and Death. 

Onr Vir^ perfectly rightly .says that ''''V 

not in reality, but ‘ to the sight’ , in other words 

so hut in faci are not. Just what is *ere about fern *a « 

terrifying as legend would have us 

lash^ why Va 7 ^Helf 1 oo"rl 

;7ophro t wh« Xn 

be done, who say drat to hear up mder the togswe . 

speah of is beyond the capacicy ^ do them- 

more highly I rate these people s abihties ^ ^ 

selvesl 1 say that they are just as ^tTo^acS 

these things, hut won t. In any event w P "WTao hasn’t 
trying them has found them prove beyond bim? Who hasn 

* Virgil, Aeueid, Vlia??- 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC 


CIV, 26 

noticed how much easier they are in the actual doing? It’s 
not because tliey’re hard that we lose confidence; they’re 
hard because we lack the confidence. 

If you still need an example, take Socrates, an old man who 
had known his full share of suffering, who had taken every 
blow life could inflict, and still remained unbeaten either by 
poverty, a burden for him aggravated by domestic worries, 
or by constant hardships, including those endured on military 
service. Apart from what he had to contend with at home - 
whether one thinks of his wife with her shrewish ways and 
nagging tongue, or his intractable children, more like their 
mother than their father - his whole life was lived either in 
war-time or under tyranny or imder a ‘democracy that 
outdid even wars and tyrants in its cruelties. The war went 
.on for twenty-seven years. After the fighting was ended, the 
state was handed over to the mercy of the Thirty Tyrants, a 
considerable number of whom were hostile to him. The 
final blow was his conviction and sentence on the most 
serious of charges: he was accused of blasphemy and of 
corrupting the younger generation, whom, it was alleged, he 
turned into rebels against God, their fathers and the state. 
After that came the prison and the poison. And so little effect 
did all this have on Socrates’ spirit, it did not even affect the 
expression on his face. What a rare and wonderful story of 
achievement ! To the very last no one ever saw Socrates m 
any particular mood of gaiety or depression. Through all the 
ups and downs of fortime his was a level temperament. 

Would you like another example? Take the modem one of 
Marcus Cato, with whom fortune dealt in an even more 
belligerent and tmremitting fashion. At every point she stood 
in his way, even at the end, at his death; yet he demonstrated 
that a brave man can live in defiance of fortune and can die in 
defiance of fortune. The whole of his life was passed cither in 
civil war or in conditions of developing civil conflict. And of 

192 



°^’32 LETTER CIV 

W no less than of Socrates it is possible to say that he carried 
hiniself clear of slavery* (unless, perhaps, you take the view 
n Caesar and Crassus were firiends of freedom), 

when his country was in a state of constant change, no one 
ever saw a change in Cato. In every situation he was placed 
% He showed himself always the same man, whether in office 
praetor, in defeat at the pohs, under attack in court, as . 
governor in his province, on the public platform, in the 
hdd, or in death itself. In that moment, too^ of panic for the 
^public, when Caesar stood on the one side, backed by ten 
kgions of the finest fighting men and the entire resources 
^d support of foreign countries as well, and . on the other 
stood Pompey, by himself a match for all comers, and when 
people were mowng to join either the one or the other, Cato 
on his own established something of a party pledged to 
ght for the Republic. If you try to picture the period to 
yourself you will see on the one side the populace, the mob 
^ ^gog for revolution, on the other the time-honoured 
wca of Rome, the aristocracy and knighthood; and two 
orlom figures, Cato and republicanism, between them. You 
find it an impressive sight, I can assure you, as you watch 

The Son of Atreus and King Priam with 
Achilles wroth with both.f 

hor there is Cato denouncing each of them, trying to disarm 
pair of them. And die way he casts his vote between them 
h: If Caesar wins, I Idll myself; if Pompey, I go into chle. 
^hat had a man to fear who, win or lose, had dictated to 
himself such a choice of fates as might have been decreed 
him by an utterly exasperated enemy? And diat is how he 
came to die, carrying out Ins own sclf-scntcncc. 

* At this point of uncertainty in the text I have adopted the reading 
icrvittiti tc cduxisse suggested by Haase, 
t Virgil, Acncul, 1:458. 


193 



LETTERS FROM 'A STOIC . 07,33 
You -vviJI see, too, the capacity of man for hardship: on 
at the head of his troops he crossed the deserts of North 
Africa. You see that thirst can be endured as well: always in 
^mour, trailing over a sun-baked plateau the remnants of a 
Ijcaten army, an army without supplies, he was invariably ti 
last to drmk whenever they came upon water. You see ths 
a man can think equally little of either the distinction of o&c 
or the stigma of re)cction: on the day of his election defeat hi 
played fives at the place of polling. You see that men can def) 
the might of their superiors : for, with no one daring offend 
either Caesar or Pompey except to curry favour with the 
other, Cato challenged the pair of them simultaneously. You 
see that a man can diink as little of death as of exile: he 
condemned himself to both, and war in the meantime. 

We, then, can show as spirited an attitude to just the same 
things if we will only choose to slip the yoke from our necks. 
But first we have to reject the life of pleasures; they make us 
soft and wornanish; they are insistent in their demands, and 
what is more, require us to make insistent demands on fortune. 
And then we need to look down on wealth, which is the wage 
of slavery. Gold and silver and everything else that clutters 
our prosperous homes should be discarded. Freedom cannot 
be won without sacrifice. If you set a high value on her, 
everything else must be valued at little. - 


LETTER CV 

Yes, I’ll give you some rules to observe that will enable you 
to live in greater safety. You for your part I suggest should 
listen as carefully to the advice I give you as you would if I 
were advising you on how to look after your health at 

Ardea. 


194 



LETTER CV 

Now tlunk of the things which goad man into destroying 
loan, you 11 find that they are hope, envy, hatred, fear and 
contempt. Contempt is the least important of the lot, so much 
so t at a m^her of men have actually taken shelter behind it 
, protection s sake. For if a person feels contempt for some- 
one, e tramples on him, doubtless, but he passes on. No one 
pursue an unremitting and persistent policy of injury to a 
^an or whom he feels nothing but contempt. Even in battle 
c man on the ground is left alone, the fighting being with 
^ ose still on their feet. Coming to hope, so long as you own 
S likely to arouse the greed or grasping instincts of 
ers, so long as you possess nothing out of the ordinary (for 
^^1* ® smallest things if they are rare or little 

own), you h have nothing to worry about from the hopes 
° grasping characters. Envy you’ll escape if you haven’t 
° truded yourself on other people’s notice, if you haven’t 


flaunted 


your possessions, if you’ve learnt to keep your satis- 
action to yourself. Hatred either comes from giving offence, 

. that you’ll avoid by refiaining firom deliberately provok- 
^g anyone, or is quite uncalled for: here your safeguard will 
c ordinary tact. It is a kind of hatred that has been a source 
01 danger to a lot of people; men have been hated without 
avmg any actual enemy. As regards not being feared, a 
federate fortune and an easy-going nature will secure you 
that. People should see that you’re not a person it is dangerous 
to offend; arid with you a reconciliation should be both easy 
^d dependable. To be feared inside your own home, it may 
00 added, is as much a source of trouble as being feared out- 
side it - slave or free, there isn’t a man who hasn’t power 
enough to do you injury. Besides, to be feared is to fear: no 
one has been able to strdee terror into others and at the same 
tunc enjoy peace of mind himself. There remains contempt. 

^ ■* The text at this point is corrupt. I have adopted the emendations 
sipanim tiota and si rare suggested by Buccheler and Madvig.- 

195 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC CT.5 

Tiie person who has made contempt his ally, who has been 
despised because he has chosen to be despised, has the measure 
of it under his control. Its disadvantages are negatived by the 
possession of respected qualities and of fnends having in- 
fluence with some person with the necessary influence. Such 
influential friends arc people with whom it is. well worA 
having tics, without being so tied up with them that their 
protection costs you more than the original danger might 
have done. 

But nothing will help quite so much as just keeping quiet, 
talking with other people as little as possible, with yourself as 
much as possible. For conversation has a kind of charm about 
it, an insinuating and insidious something that elicits secrets 
jSrom us just like love or liquor. Nobody will keep the things 
he hears to himself, and .nobody will repeat just what he 
hears and no more. Neither will anyone who has failed to keep 
a story to himself keep the name of his informant to himselt. 
Every person without exception has someone to whom 
he confides everything that is confided to himself Even 
supposing he puts some guard on his garrulous tongue and 
is content with a single pair of ears, he will be the creator 
of a host of later listeners - such is the way in which what 
was but a little while before a secret becomes common 


rumour. , 

Never to wrong others takes one a long way towaros 
peace of mind. People who know no self-restraint lead 
stormy and disordered lives, passing their time in a state ot 
fear commensurate with the injuries they do to others, 
never able to relax. After every act they tremble, paralysed, 
their consciences continually demanding an answer, not allow- 
ing them to get on with other things. To expect pumshment 
is to suffer it; and to earn it- is to expect it. Where there is a 
u A rnnscience some circumstance or other may provide one 
with impunity! but never with feedom &om amdety; for a 

196 



’3 LETTHR evil 

person taiccs the attitude that even if he isn’t foiuid out, there’s 
poss’hility of it. His sleep is troubled. AVhenever 
someone clsc’s misdeed he thinks of his own, 
y' rch seems to him all too inadequately hidden, all too 
equately blotted out of people’s memories. A guilty 
penon sometimes has tlie luck to escape detection, but never 
to feel sure of it. 


LETTER evil 

^heke s that moral insight of yours? Where’s that acuteness 
t perception? Or magnanimity? Docs something as trivial 
^ that upset you? Your slaves have seen your absorption in 
rismess as their chance to run away. So be it, you have been 
et down by friends - for' by all means let tliem keep the name 
^e mistakenly bestowed on them and be called such just to 
heighten their disgrace; but die fact is that your affairs have 
oeen freed for good and all of a number of people on whom 
. your trouble was being wasted and who considered you 
insufferable to anyone but yourself. There’s nothing unusual 
or surprising about it all. To be put out by this sort of thing 
IS as ridiculous as grumbling about being spattered in the 
street or getting dirty where it’s muddy. One has to accept 
life on the same terms as the public baths, or crowds, or 
travel. Things will get thrown at you and things will hit you. 
Life’s no soft affair. It’s a long road you’ve started on: you 
can t but expect to have slips and knocks and falls, and get 
tired, and openly wish — a lie — for death. At one place you 
will part from a companion, at another bury one, and be 
afiraid of one at another. These are the kind of things you’ll 
come up against all along this rugged journey. Wanting to 
die? Let the personality be made ready to face everything; let 

X97 . 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC , cm,i' 

it be made to realize that it lias come to terrain on wHcli 
thunder and lighming play, terrain on which 

Grief and vengeful Care have set their couch, 

And pallid Sickness dwells, and drear Old Age.* 

This is the company in which you must live out your days. 
Escape them you cannot, scorn them you can. And scorn 
them you will if by constant reflection you have anticipated 
future happenings. Everyone faces up more bravely to a 
thing for which he has long prepared himself, sufferings, even, 
being withstood if they have been trained for in advance. 
Those who are unprepared, on the other hand, are panic- 
stricken by the most insignificant happenings. We must see 
to it that nothing takes us by surprise. And since it is in- 
variably unfamiliarity that makes a thing more formidable 
than it really is, this habit of continual reflection will ensure 
that no form of adversity finds you a complete beginner. 

TVe been deserted by my slaves!’ Others have been plun- 
dered, incriminated, set upon, betrayed, beaten up, attacked 
with poison or with calumny — mention anything you like, 
it has happened to plenty of people. A vast variety of missiles 
are launched with us as their target. Some are planted in our 
flesh already, some are hurtling towards us at this very moment, 
others merely grazing us in passing on their way to other 
targets. Let’s not be taken aback by any of the things we re 
bom to, things no one need complain at for the simple reason 
that they’re the same for everybody. Yes, the same for every- 
body; for even if a man does escape something, it a 
thing* which he . might have suffered. The fairness of a law 
does not consist in its effect being actually felt by all alike, 
but in its having been laid down for all alike. Let’s get this 
sense of justice firmly into our heads and pay up without 
* Virgil, Aetteid. VI:a74-5. 

198 


CVII.IO LETTER evil 

grumbling the taxes arising firom our mortal state. "Winter 
brings in, the cold, and we Kave to shiver; smnmer brings 
hack the heat and we have to swelter. Bad weather tries t e 
health and we have to he ill. Somewhere or other we are going 
to have encounters with wild beasts, and with man, too, - 
store dangerous than all those beasts. Floods will rob us o 
one dung, fire of another. These are conditions of our 
existence which we cannot change. What we can do is a opt 
a noble spirit, such a spirit as befits a good man, so th^ we 
tnay bear up bravely under all tliat fortune sends us and bring 
our wills into tune with nature’s; reversals, after all, ® 

means by which nature regulates this visible realm o ers. 
clear skies follow cloudy; after the calm comes the storm; 

winds take turns to blow; day succeeds night, "w 
part of the heavens is in the ascendmt, another is sinking, t is 
hy means of opposites that eternity endures. , 

This is the law to which our minds are needing to e 
reconciled. This is the law they should he following and 
obeying. They should assume that whatever happ^s was 
hound to happen and re&ain from railing at namre. One can 
do nothing better than endure what cannot be cured and 
attend uncomplainingly the God at whose instance t gs 
come about. It is a poor soldier that follows his colander 
grumbling. So let us receive our orders reachly an c eer y, 
and not desert the ranks along the march — the marc ® ^ 
glorious fabric of creation in which everything we s 
suffer is a strand. And let us address Jupiter, whose gmdmg 
hand directs dais mighty work, in the way our own ClcanthK 
did, in some most expressive lines which I may per aps 
pardoned for translating in view of the examp e set ere y 
that master of expressiveness, Cicero. If you ^ ® ^ 
much the better; if not, you will at least know that I was 

following Cicero’s example. 


199 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC cm,n 

Lead me. Master of the soaring vault 
Of Heaven, lead me. Father, where you wilL 
I stand here prompt and eager to obey. 

And cv*n suppose I were unwilling, still 
I should attend you and know suffering, 

Dishonourably and grumbh'ng, when I might 
Have done so and been good as well. For Fate 
The wilh’ng leads, the imv/ilh'ng drags along.* 

Let us speak and live like that. Let fate find us ready and 
eager. Here is your noble spirit - the one which has put itself 
in the hands of fate; on the other side we have the puny 
degenerate spirit which struggles, and which sees nothing 
right in the way the universe is ordered, and would rather 
reform the gods than reform itself. 


LETTER CVIII 

The subject you ask me about is one of those in which 
knowledge has no other justification than the knowledge it- 
self. Nevertheless, andjust because it is so justified, you’re in a 
great hurry and reluctant to wait for the encyclopedia of 
ethics I’m compiling at this very moment. Well, I shall let 
you have your an^er immediately, but first I’m going to 
tell you how this enthusiasm for learning, with which I can 
see you’re on fire, is to be brought tmder control if it isn t 
going to stand in its own way. What is wanted is neither 
haphazard dipping nor a greedy onslaught on knowledge in 
the mass. The whole will be reached through its parts, and 

* St Augustine quotes this fragment of Cleanthes as Seneca’s (De 


200 



cvni,6 LETTER CVIII 

the burden, must "be adjusted to our strength. We mustn t 
take on more than we can manage. You shouldn t atteinpt to 
absorb all you want to — just what you’ve room for, simp y 
adopt the right approach and you will end up with room 
for all you want. The more the mind takes in the more it 
expands. 

I remember a piece of advice which Attains gave me in 
the days when I practically laid siege to his lecture a , 
always first to arrive and last to go, and would draw im 
into a discussion of some point or other even when e was 
out taking a walk, for he was always readily available to his 
students, not just accessible. * A person teaching and a person 
learning,’ he said, ‘should have the same end in view, t e 
improvement of the latter.’ A person who goes to a philo- 
sopher should carry away with him something or ot er o 
value every day; he should return home a sounder man 
least more capable of becoming one. And he wil . or t e 
’ power of philosophy is such that she helps not only those 
who devote themselves to her but also those who con^ into 
contact with her, A person going out into the sun, w et er 
or not this is what he is going out for, wih acc^ire u 
Customers who sit around rather too long in simp se mg 
perfumes carry the scent of the place away with them. ^ 
people who have been with a philosopher are boun to ave 
derived from it something of benefit even to the inattentive. 

Note that I say the inattentive, not the hostile. ^ 

‘That’s all very well, but don’t we all know certam people 
who have sat at a pluiosopher s feet year after year wi out 
acquiring even a semblance of wisdom? Of course o 
persevering, conscientious people, too. I prefer to c em a 
philosopher’s squatters, not students. Some corne not to 
learn but just to hear him, in the same way as we re rawn to a 
theatre, for the sake of entertainment, to treat our ears to a 
play, or music, or an address. You’ll find that a large propor- 


201 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 


CTni,6 


tion of the philosopher’s audience is made up of this element, 
which regards his lecture-hall as a place of lodging for periods 
of leisure. They’re not concerned to rid themselves of any 
faults tliere, or acquire any rule of life by which to test their 
characters, but simply to enjoy to the foil the pleasures 
ear has to offer. Admittedly some of them actually come vnth 
notebooks, but with a view to recording not the content o 
the lecture, but words from it - to be passed on to others wi 
the same lack of profit to the hearer as they themselves 
derived from hearing them. Some of them are stirred by 6 
noble sentiments they hear; their faces and spirits light up an 
they enter into the emotions of the speaker, going mto a 
transport just like the eimuch priests who work thems^v 
into a frenzy, to order, at the sound of a Phrygian nu^ 
They are captivated and aroused not by a din of empty wor ^ 
but by the splendour of the actual content of the 
words - any expression of bold or spirited defiance of oea 
or fortune mak^g you keen to translate what you 
into action straight away. They are deeply affected by t ^ 
words and become the persons they are told to be - or wo 
if the impression on their minds were to last, if this magnm 
cent enthusiasm were not immediately intercepted by tna 
discourager of noble conduct, the crowd: very few succee 
in getting home in the same frame of mind, . 

It is easy enough to arouse in a listener a desire for what is 
honourable; for in every one of us nature has laid the foun a- 
tions or sown the seeds of the virmes. We are bom to them 
all, all of us, and when a person comes along with the 
stimulus, then those qualities of the personaKty are ^wahene , 
so to speak, firom their slumber. Haven’t you noticed ho 
the theatre murmurs agreement whenever some^g 
spoken the truth of which we generally recognize and imam 

niously confirm? 


202 -' 


^12 


LETTER CVni 


The poor lack much, the greedy everything. 

The greedy man does no one any good, 

But harms no person more than his own self.* 

Your worst miser will clap these lines and be delighted at 
^ring his own faults lashed in this manner. Imagine how 
niuch more likely it is that this will happen when such things 
Me being said by a philosopher, interspersing passages of sound 
sdvice with lines of poetry calculated to deepen their hold on 
unenlightened minds. For ‘the constricting requirements of 
^Mse, as Cleanthes used to say, ‘give one’s meaning all the 
greater force, in the same way as one’s breath produces a far 
p^eater noise when it is channelled through a trumpet’s 
uug and narrow tube before its , final expulsion through the 
"Widening opening at the end.’ The same things stated in 
pilose are Hstened to with less attention and have much less 
Unpact. "When, a rhythm is introduced, when a fine idea is 
compressed into a definite metre, the very same thought 
comes hurtling at one like a missile launched from a fully 
extended arm. A lot, for example, is said about despising 
nioney. The listener is told at very considerable length that 
^en should look on riches as consisting in the spirit and not in 
udierited estates, and that a man is wealthy if he has attuned 
^tnself to his restricted means and has made himself rich on 
little. But verses such as the following he finds a good deal 
Uiore striking. 

He needs hut little who desires hut little. 


He has his wish, whose wish can he 
To have what is enough. 

^^hen we hear these lines and others like them, we feel 
impelled to admit the truth. The people for whom nothing 

* Both quotations, and the next two, are beheved to be fragments of 
plays of Publilius Syrus. 


203 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC CVin,i3 

is ever enough admire and applaud such a verse and publicly 
declare their distaste for money. When you see them in such 
a mood, keep at them and drive this home, piling it on them, 
having nothing to do with plays on words, syllogisms, 
sophistries and all the other toys of sterile intellectual clever- 
ness. Speak out against the Jove of money. Speak out against 
extravagance. When you see that you’ve achieved something 
and had an effect on yotu: Jisteners, lay on all the harder. It is 
hardly behevable how much can be achieved by this sort of 
speech, aimed at curing people, wholly directed to the good 
of the people .listening, "^^en the character is impressionable 
it is easily won over to a passion for what is noble and honour- 
able; while a person’s character is still malleable, and only 
corrupted to a mild degree, truth strikes deep if she finds the 
right kinef of advocate. 

For my part, at any rate, when I heard Attalus winding up 
the case against the faults of character, the mistaken attitudes 
and the evils generally of the lives we lead, I frequently felt a 
sense of the sorry plight of the human race and looked on him 
as a kind of sublime being who had risen higher than the 
limits of human aspiration. He himself would use the Stoic 
term ‘king’ of himself; but to me he seemed more than a 
king, as being a man who had the right to pass judgement on 
the conduct and the character of monarchs. And when he 
began extolling to us the virtues of poverty and showing us 
how everything which went beyond our acmal needs was 
-just so much unnecessary weight, a burden to the man who 
had to carry it, I often had a longing to walk out of that lecture 
hall a poor man. When he started exposing our pleasures md 
commending to us, along with moderation in our diet, 
physical purity and a mind equally uncontaminated, uncon- 
teminated not only by illicit pleasures but by unnecessa^ 
ones as well, I would become enthusiastic about keeping the 
appetites for food and drink firmly in their place. With the 

204 



LETTER CVIII 

^ult that some of this, Lucilius, has lasted with me right 
™ough life. For I started out on it all with tremendous 
’nergy and enthusiasm, and later, after my return to public 
I managed to retain a few of the principles as regards 
which I had made this promising beginning. This is how I 
to g^ve up oysters and mushrooms for the rest of my 
We (for they are not really food to us but titbits which induce 
people who have already had as much as they can take to go 
OQ eating - the object most desired by gluttons and others 
.0 stuff themselves with more than they can hold — being 
Jtems which will come up again as easUy as they go down). 

is too is why throughout life I have always abstained &om 
Ij^Wg scent, as the best smell a body can have is no smell at all. 
uis is why no wine ever finds its way into my stomach. 
Ws is the reason for my life-long avoidance of hot baths, 
elieving as I do that it is effeminate as well as pointless to 
stew one’s body and exhaust it with continual sweating. Some 
other things to which I once said good-bye have made their 
reappearance, but nevertheless, in these cases in which I have 
ceased to practise totdl abstinence, I succeed in observing a 
hmit,' which is something hardly more than a step removed 
om total abstinence (and even perhaps more difficult — with 
some things less effort of will is required to cut them out 
^together than to have recourse to them in moderation). 

Now that I’ve started disclosing to you how much greater 
enthusiasm was in taking up philosophy as a young man 
dian. it is when it comes to keeping it up in my old age, I 
sban t be ashamed to confess die passionate feelings which 
Fythagoras inspired in me. Sotion used to tell us why Pytha- 
S^ras, and later Sextius, was a vegetarian. Each had a quite 
different reason, but each was a striking one. Sextius believed 
that man had enough food to sustain him without shedding 
blood, and that when men took this tearing of flesh so far 
that it became a pleasure a habit of cruelty was formed. He 

205 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 


cvni,i8 


argued in addition that the scope for people’s extravagance 
was in any case something that should be reduced; and be 
gave reasons for inferring that variety of diet was incompatible 
with our physical make-up and inimical to health. Pythagoras, 
on the other hand, maintained that all creatures v/ere inter- 
related and that there was a system of exchange of souls 
involving transmigration 'from one bodily form to another. 
If . we are to believe Pythagoras, no soul ever imdergoes 
death, or even a suspension of its existence except perhaps for 
the actual moment of transfusion into another body. 
is not the moment for inquiring by what stages or at what 
point a soul completes its wanderings through a succession 
of other habitations and reverts to human form. It is enoug 
for our present purposes that he has instilled into people ^ 
dread of committing the crime of parricide, in view of e 

possibihty that they might, all unknowing, come across me 

soul of an ancestor and with knife or teeth do it 
outrage^ assuming that the spirit of a relative might e 
lodging in the flesh concerned. After setting out this theory 
and supplementing it with arguments of his own, Souon 
would say, ‘You cannot accept the idea of soids bemg 
assigned to one body after another, and the notion that w 
we call death is only a move to another home? You canno 
accept that the soul which was once that of a m^ 
soioum in wild beasts, or in our own domestic ai^als, or m 
tbe creatures of the deep? You cannot accept timt noting 
pver perishes on this earth, instead merely undergoing 

change in its whereabouts? And that the an^ 

• h(»venly bodies that revolve in their unaltera 

Ics moves in cycles, with its souls propelled along an 
„^th of thefo^own? WeU, the fket that these ideas are 

orbital pam or cbould make you 


I'udsement. You should preserve an open mmd on 

Sfwhoie 

206 



LETTER CVIII 

abstain from caring the flesh of animals will mean guiltless- 
ness; and even if they are not, it vwll still mean frugal living, 
"^at do you lose by bclic\ring in it all? All I am depriving 
you of is what the lions and rite vultures feed on.’ 

_ hired by this teaching I became a vegetarian, and by the 
tune a year had gone by was finding it an enjoyable as well 
as an easy habit. I v/as beginning to feel that my mind was 
niore active as a result of it - tliough I would not take my 
oath to you now that it really was. I suppose you want to 
^ow how I came to give up tlie practice. Well, my years 
^ a young man coincided with the early part of Tiberius 
when certain religious cults of foreign origin were 
being promoted, and among other tilings abstinence from 
certain kinds of animal food was regarded as evidence of 
adherence to such superstitions. So at tlic request of my father, 
^ho did not really fear my being prosecuted, but who 
detested philosophy, I resumed my normal habits. And in 
fact he had little difficulty in persuading me to adopt a fuller 
diet. Another thing, though, which Attains used to recom- 
mend was a hard mattress; and that is the kind I still use even 
hi my old age, the kind which shows no trace of a body 
havmg slept on it. I tell you all this just to show you the 
tremendous enthusiasm with which the merest beginner will 
Set about attaining the very highest goals provided someone 
gives him the necessary prompting and encouragement. 
Things tend, in fact, to go wrong ; part of the blame lies, on 
the teachers of philosophy, who today teach us how to argue 
instead of how to live, part on their, students, who come to 
the teachers in the first place with a view to developing not 
their character but their intellect. The result has been the 
transformation of philosophy, the study of wisdom, into 
philology, the study of words. 

The object which we have in view, after all, makes a 
great deal of difference to the manner in which we approach 


207 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC CVin ,24 

any subject. If he intends to become a literary scholar, a 
person examining his Virgil does not say to himself when he 
reads that magnificent phrase 

Irrestorable, Time flies* 

*We need- to bestir ourselves; life will leave us behind unless 
we make haste; the days are fleeting by, carried away at a 
gallop, carrying us with them; we fail to realize the pace at 
w^hich we are being swept along; here we are making com- 
prehensive plans for the future and generally behaving as if 
we had all the leisure in the world when there are precipices 
aU aroimd us.’ No, his purpose is to note that Virgil invariably 
uses this word ‘flies’ whenever he speaks of the swift passage 
of time. 


Life’s finest days, for us poor human beings. 
Fly first; the sicknesses and sufferings, 

A bleak old age, the snatching hand 
Implacable of merdless death, creep near.f 


It is the person with philosophy in his mind who takes these 
words in the way they are meant to be taken. ‘Virgfl,’ he 
says, ‘never speaks of the hours as “passing” but as “flying > 
this being the swiftest form of travel. He is also telling us that 
the finest ones are the first to be borne away. Then why are 
we so slow to get ourselves moving so as to be able to keep 
up with the pace of this swiftest of all things?’ The best parts 
of life are flitting by, the worse are to come. The wine which 
is poured out first is the purest wine in the bottle, the heaviest 
particles and any cloudiness settling to the bottom. It is just 
the same with human life. The best comes first. Are we going 
to Jet others drain it so as to keep die dregs for ourselves. 
Let that sentence stick in your mind, accepted as unquesrion- 
ingly as if it had been uttered by an oracle: 

* Georgies, 111 : 284 . f Georgies, 111:66-8. 

208 



cm, 2^ 


LETTER CVIII 


Life’s finest days, for us poor human beings. 

Fly first, 

finest? Because what is to come is uncertain. Why 
finest? Because while we arc young we arc able to learn; 
■wfien the' mind is quick to learn and still susceptible to 
framing we can turn it to better ends. Because this is a good 
time for hard .work, for studies as a means of keeping our 
otams alert and busy and for strenuous activities as a means 
of exercising our bodies; the time remaining to us afterwards 
fr marked by relative apathy and indolence, and is all the 
closer to the end. Let us act on this, then, wholeheartedly. 
Let us cut out all distractions and work away at this alone for 
tear that otherwise we may be left behind and only eventually 
realize one day the swiftness of tlic passage of this fleeting 
phenomenon, time, which we arc powerless to hold back, 
Every day as it comes should be welcomed and reduced 
forthwith into our own possession as if it were the finest day 
imaginable. What flics past has to be seized at. 

These thoughts never occur to someone who looks at the 
lines I have quoted dirough the eyes of our literary scholar. 
He does not reflect that our first days are onr best days for the 
reason that ‘the sicknesses creep near’, with old age 
bearing down on us, hovering over our heads whilst our 
minds are still full of our youth. No, his comment is that 
Virgil constantly couples ‘sicknesses’ and ‘old age’ (and not 
without good reason, I can tell you: I should describe old 
age itself as a kind of incurable sickness). The scholar further 
remarks on the' epithet attached to old age, pointing out that 
file poet speaks in the passage quoted of ‘ bleak old age ’ and 
m another passage writes 

Where dwell wan Sicknesses and bleak Old Age.* 

* Aetwi(}, Y 1 :27s. 


us.-tx 


209 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 


cm, 29 


There is nothing particularly surprising about this way 
which everyone has of deriving material for his own indi- 
vidual interests from identical subject-matter. In one and the 
same meadow the cow looks for grass, the dog for a hare and 
the stork for a lizard. When a commentator, a literary man 
and a devotee of philosophy pick up Cicero’s book Tlie 
State, each directs his attention in different directions. The 
philosopher finds it astonishing that so much could have 
been said in it by way of criticism of justice. The commenta- 
tor, coming to the very same reading matter, inserts this 
sort offoomote: ‘There are two Roman kings one of whom 
has no father and another no mother, the mother of Servius 


being a matter on which there is uncertainty, and Ancus, 
the grandson of Numa, having no father on record. He 
observes further that ‘the man to whom we give the tide 
Dictator and read about in the history books under the same 
liamc was called the Master of the Commons by the early 
Romans; this title survives to the present day in the augurd 
records, and the fact that the person appointed by him^ as his 
deputy was known as the Master of the Knights is evidence 
that this is correct.’ He similarly observes that ‘Romulus 
died during an eclipse of the sun’; that ‘the right of appeal to 
the Commons was recogm'zed as early as the period of me 
monarchy; there is authority for this in the pontifical records, 
in the opinion of a number of scholars, in particular Fen^ 
tella.’ When the Hterary scholar goes through the sarne hook, 
the first thing he records in his notebook is Cicero’s use ot 
reapsc for « ipse, and sepse likewise for se ipse. He thm go« 
on to examine changes in usage over the years. “ 

example, Cicero uses the expression: Smee we have be 
lle/back tight from the alx by this interruption of his , 
notes tHhc oifa was the name which the old Romans 
^ m the finishing line in the stadium that we nowaday 
Sleta Xhe next thing he does is assemble Imes 


210 



CVin.36 , LETTER CVIII 

Ennius, and in particular those referring to Scipio of 
Afiica; 

None, foe nor Roman, can assess the value 
Of his succour and do justice to his feats* 

Prom this passage the scholar claims to deduce that the word 
‘succour’ to the early Romans signified die rendering not 
ttterely of assistance hut of actual services, Enmus saying that 
no one, foe or Roman, was capable of assessing the value of 
the services Scipio rendered Rome. Next he congratulates 
himself on discovering the source firom which Virgil chose to 
take the following : 

Above whose head the mighty gates of heaven 
Thunder.'!’ 

tells us that Ennius filched the idea from Homer and that 
Virgil filched it from Ennius, there being a couplet of Enmus 
{preserved in this very work of Cicero’s I was mentioning, 
T’he which reads 

If any man may rise to heaven’s levels, 

To me, alone, lie open heaven’s huge gates. 

hut enough, or before I know where I am I shall be slip- 
ping into the scholar’s or , conunentator’s shoes myself, l^y 
advice is really this; what we hear the philosophers saying 
^d what we find in their writings should be applied in o^ 
pursuit of the happy life. We should hunt out the helpful 
pieces of teaching, and the spirited and noble-mmded sayings 
which are capable of immediate practical application 
far-fetched or archaic expressions or extravagant metaphors 
and figures of speech - and learn them so well that words 
become works. No one to my mind lets humanity down quite 

■* A fragment of a lost epic. 

•t Georgies, in:a66-i. 


2II 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC cm ,36 

SO much as those who study philosophy as if it were a sort of 
commercial skill and then proceed to live in a quite different 
manner from the way tliey tell other people to live. People 
prone to every fault they denounce are walking advertisements 
of the uselessness of their training. That kind of man can be of 
no more help to me as an instructor than a steersman who is 
seasick in a storm - a man who should be hanging on to the 
tiller when the waves are snatching it from his grasp, wrestling 
with the sea itself, rescuing his sails from the winds. What good 
to me is a vomiting and stupefied helmsman? And you may - 
well think the storm of life is a great deal more serious 
than any which ever tosses a boat. What is needed is a steering 
hand, not talking. And apart from this, everything which 
this kind of man says, everything he tosses out to a thronging 
audience, belongs to someone else. The words were said by 
Plato, said by Zeno, said by Chrysippus and Posidonius and a 
whole host more of Stoics like them. Let me indicate here how 
men can prove that their words are their own: let them put 
their preaching into practice. 

Now that I’ve given you the message I wanted to convey 
to you. I’ll go on from here to satisfy that wish of yours. 
But I’ll transfer what you wanted from me to another, 
fresh letter, to avoid your coming mentally weary to a 
subject which is a thorny one and needs to be followed with 
a conscientious and attentive ear. 


LETTER CXIV 

You ask why it is that at certain periods a corrupt liter^ 
style has come into being; and how it is that a gifted mind 
develops a leaning towards some fault or other (resuiring m 
the prevalence at one period of a bombastic form ofcxposi-. 


ziz 


LETTER- CXIV . 

at another of an . effeminate form, fashioned after the 
manner of songs); and why it is that at one time approval is 
■won by extravagant conceits and at another by sentences of 
m abrupt, allusive character that convey more to the intel- 
gence than to the ear; and why there have been eras in 
^ ch metaphors have been shamelessly exploited. The 
snswer lies in something that you hear commonly enough, 
something. which among the Greeks has passed into a proverb : 
people s speech matches their lives. And just as the way in 
^ oh each individual expresses himself resembles the way 
f ^ots, so in the case of a nation of declining morals and 
given over to luxury forms of expression at any given time 
imrror the general behaviour of that society. A luxuriant 
terary style, assuming that it is the favoured and accepted 
y e and not just appearing in the odd writer here and there, 
IS a sign of an extravagant society. The spirit and the intellect 
^^^ot be of different hues. If the spirit is sound, if it is properly 
^ justed and has dignity and self-control, the intellect will be 
Sober and sensible too, and if the former is tainted the latter 
^il be infected as well. You’ve observed surely, how a 
person s limbs drag and his feet dawdle along if his spirit is a 
ccble one? And how the lack of moral fibre shows in his 
^ery gait if bis spirit is addicted to soft li-ving? And how if 
ms spirit is a lively and dashing one his step is brisk? And how 
u It IS a prey to madness or the similar state of anger, his body 
moves along in an uncontrolled sort of way, in a rush rather 
than a walk? Isn’t this all the more likely to be the case where a 
person’s intellect is concerned, his intellect being wholly 
bound up \vitli his spirit — moulded by and responsive to it 
mid looking to it for guidance? 

The manner in which Maecenas lived is too well known for 
dicrc to be any need to describe die way he walked, his self- 
indulgent nature, his passion for self-display, his reluctance 
diat liis faults should escape people’s notice. Well, dicn, wasn’t 

213 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC cxrf,4 

his style just as undisciplined as his dress was sloppy? Wasn’t 
his vocabulary just as extraordinary as his turnout, ids retinue, 
his house, his wife? He would have been a genius if he had 
pursued a more direct path instead of going out of his way to 
avoid being intelligible, had he not been as loose in matters of 
style as he was in everything else. Which is why you’ll notice 
that his eloquence resembles a drunken man’s, tortuous and 
rambling and thoroughly eccentric. Could there be a worse 
expression than ‘the bank with mane of stream and woods’? 
And look at ‘men tilling with wherries the channel, driving 
the gardens back with the shallows’ churning over’. What 
about a person ‘curvetting at a woman’s beck, with lips on 
billing bent, a sigh the opem'ng of his addresses, neck lolling 
like a forest giant in his ecstasy’? ‘The unregenerate company 
rummage homes for victuals, raiding them with provision 
jars and trading death for hope.’ ‘But hardly should I call 
as witness on his holy day my guardian spirit.’ ‘Else the wick 
of a slender waxlight and sputtering meal.’ ‘Mothers or 
wives accoutre the hearth.’ When you read this sort of thing, 
doesn’t it immediately cross your mind that this is the same 
man who invariably went aroimd with casual clothes on m 
the capital (even when Maecenas was discharging the emperor s 
duties during the absence of Augustus, the ofBcer coming to 
him for the daily codeword would find him in informal 
attire), who appeared on the bench, on the platform and at 
any public gathering wearing a mantle draped over his head 
leaving both ears exposed, looking just like the rich man s 
runaway slave as depicted on the comic stage? The same man 
whose public escort, at a time when the nation was embroiled 
in a civil war and the capital was tmder arms and in a state or 
alarm, consisted of a pair of eunuchs, and who went through a 
thousand ceremonies of marriage with his one wife? 

These expressions of his, strung together in such an out- 
rageous fkshion, tossed out in such a careless manner, con- 

214 



®V,I0 LETTER CXIV 

^ctedVidi sucK a total disregard of universal usage, reveal 
a character equally revolutionary, equally perverted and 
peculiar, Maecenas’ greatest claim to glory is regarded as 
having been bis clemency; be spared tire sword, refrained 
&om bloodshed and showed his power only in his defiance 
of convention. But he has spoilt this very claim of his by these 
monstrous stylistic frolics; for it becomes apparent that he 
tvas not a mild man but a soft one. That perplexing word 
order, those transpositions of words and those startling 
ideas which have indeed the quality of greatness in them but 
"which lose all their effect in the expression, will make it 
obvious to anyone that his head was turned by overmuch, 
prosperity. 

It is a fault which is sometimes that of the man and some- 
times that of the age, "Where prosperity has spread luxury 
over a wide area of society, people start by paying closer 
attention to their personal turnout. The next thing that 
engages people’s energies is furniture. Then pains are devoted 
to the houses themselves, so as to have them running out over 
broad expanses of territory, to have the walls glowing with 
marble shipped from overseas and the ceilings picked out in 
Sold, to have the floors shining with a , lustre matching the 
panels overhead. Splendour then moves on to the table, 
"where praise is courted through the medium of novelty and 
Variations in the accustomed order of dishes, making what 
normally rounds off a meal the first course and giving people 
as they go what’they used before to be given on arrival. Once 
^ person s spirit has acquired the habit of disdaining what is 
customary and regards the usual as banal, it starts looking for 
novelty in its methods of expression as well. At one moment 
it will disinter and revive archaic 'or obsolete expressions; at 
another it will coin new, unheard of expressions and give a 
word a new form; at another — this is something that has 
become very common recently — the bold and firequent use of 

215 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 


cxtv.io 


metaphor passes for good style. There are some who cut their 
thoughts short and hope to win acclaim by making their 
meaning elusive, giving their audience a mere hint of it; there 
are others who stretch them out, reluctant to let them go; 
there are others still who do not merely fall into a defect of 
style (which is something that is inevitable if one is striving for 
any lofty effect), but have a passion for the defect for its own 
sake. 

So wherever you notice that a corrupt style is in general 
.favour, you may be certain that in that society peoples 
characters as well have deviated from the true path. In the 
same way as extravagance in dress and entertaining are indica- 
tions of a diseased community, so an aberrant literary style, 
provided it is widespread, shows that the spirit (from which 
people’s words derive) has also come to grief And in fact 
you need feel no surprise at the way corrupt work finds 
popularity not merely with the common bystander but with 
your relatively cultivated audience: the distinction between 
these two classes of critic is more one of dress than of dis- 
cernment. What you might find more surprising is the fact 
that they do not confine themselves to admiring passages that 
contain defects, but admire the actual defects themselves as 
well. The former thing has been the case all through history - 
no genius that ever won acclaim did so without a measure or 
indulgence. Name me any man you like who had a cele- 
brated reputation, and I’ll tell you what the age he lived m 
forgave him, what-it turned a blind eye to in his work. Ih 
show you plenty of stylists whose faults never did them any 
harm and some who were actually helped by them. I’U even 
say this: I could show you some men of the highest reno^ 
men held up as objects of wonder and admiration, m whose 
” “to lend thci fault, would be to destroy 4em, to 
faults being so inextricably bound up with their virtues. 

Bral, toe are no feed rules of style. They are governed 

aid 



LETTER CXIV 

jjy the usage of society and usage never stands still for any 
Jength of time. Many speakers hark back to earlier centuries 
wr their vocabulary, talking in the language of the Twelve 
Tables.* Gracchus, Crassus and Curio arc too polislied and 
modem for them. They go right back to Appius and Corun- 
tmuus. Others, by contrast, in seeking to confine tlieinsclvcs 
to familiar, everyday expressions, slip into an undistinguished 
manner. Both these practices, in dicir different ways, are 
ebased style (quite as much so as the rejection of any expres- 
sion that is not high-sounding, florid and poetical, avoiding 
0 mdispensable expressions in normal use). The one is as 
much a fault as the other, in my view, the fixst paying undue 
^ention to itself and the second imduly neglecting itself. 

0 former removes the hair from its legs as well, the latter 
iiot even from its armpits. 

ket us turn our attention to composition. How many 
speaes of fault can I show you where this is concerned? Some 
me it broken and uneven, and go out of their way to dis- 
^ange any passage with a relatively smooth and even flow. 

bey Want every transition to come with a jolt, and see 
ymility and forcefulness in a style the irregularities of which 
jm the ear. With some other literary figures it is not a case 
composition but of setting words to melodies, so sweetly, 
softly do they glide along. What shall I say about the kind in 
"which words are held back and keep us waiting for a long 
before they make their reluctant appearance right at 
die end of the period? What of that, like Cicero’s, which 
moves to its conclusion in a leisurely faslhon, in a gentle and 


* A set of tablets dating from 451-450 b. c., wbich record a basic code 
of laws and were the earliest piece of Latin writing 'known to the 
Romans. 

It may be noted here that in this letter Seneca sees or draws no 
distinction between rules applying to literature and rules applying to 
oratory. 


217 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC CXiV,l6 


delayed incline, and unvaryingly true to its customary 
rhythm? 

In the field of the epigram, too, faults comprise a tameness 
and childishness, or a boldness and daring that oversteps the 
bounds of decency, or a richness that has a cloying quality, 
or a barrenness in the outcome, an ineffectiveness, a ringing 
quality and nothing more. 

These faults are introduced by some individual dominat- 
ing letters at the time, are copied by the rest and handed on 
from one person to another. Thus in Sallust’s heyday abruptly 
terminated sentences, imexpectedly sudden endings and a 
brevity carried to the point of obscurity passed for a polished 
style. Lucius Arruntius, the historian of the Punic War and 
a man of unusual simplicity of character, was a follower of 
Sallust and strove after that kind of style. ‘By means of 
money he procured an army’, hired one, in other words, i5 
an expression found in Sallust. Arruntius took a fancy to 
this expression ‘procured’ and found a place for it on every 
page, saying in one passage: ‘They procured our rout , m 
another: ‘King Hiero of Syracuse procured a war’, and in 
another: ‘This news procured the surrender of the people of 
Panormus to the Romans.’ These are merely by way of 
giving you samples of the practice - the whole book is rife 
with them. What was occasional in Sallust is of frequent, 
almost incessant ocourrence in Arnmtius, - which is easily 


enough explained, for whereas Sallust hit on such expressions 
Arruntius cultivated them. You can see what the result is 
• when some writer’s fault is taken as a model. Sallust spoke 
of ‘wintry rains’, Arriintius, in the first book of T}ie PiWiC 
War, says: ‘Suddenly the weather was wintry.’ In another 
place, when he wants to describe a particular year as having 
been a cold one, he says: ‘The whole year was wintry.’ In 
another passage he writes: ‘From there he despatched sixty 
transport vessels, lightly laden apart firom troops and essential 

218 



CXIV,22 


LETTER CXIV 


ttew, in spite of a wintry northerly gale.’ He drags the word 
constantly, in every conceivable place. Sallust at one point 
Writes: Seeking, amid civil war, the plaudits of rectitude and 
integrity . Arruntius was miable to restrain himself from in- 
serting right at the beginning of his first book mention of 
hegulus tremendous 'plaudits*. 

Now these faults, and others like them, stamped on a 
Wnters style by imitation, are not themselves evidence of 
extravagant ways or corrupt attitudes. For the things upon 
Which you base any judgement on a person’s psychology must 
e things peculiar to himself, things that spring from his own 
nature, a hot-tempered man having a hot-tempered style, an 
eniotional man an over-excited one, a self-indulgent man a 
soft and flabby one and so on. And the last is the maimer one 
observes adopted by the sort of person who has his beard 
P licked out, or has it plucked out in parts, who keeps liim- 
self close-shaven and smooth around his lips but leaves the 
test of it to grow, who wears cloaks in flamboyant colours, 
Who wears a diaphanous robe, who is reluctant to do anything 
ibat might escape people’s attention, who provokes and 
courts such attention and so long as he is looked at does not 
tnind whether it is with disapproval. Such is tlie manner of 
li^aecenas and every other writer whose stylistic errors are 
itot accidental but deliberate and calculated. It is something 
ikat stems from a serious affliction of the spirit. When a 
person is drinking his tongue only starts stumbling after his 
^Rental faculties have succumbed and given way or broken 
down. The same applies with this drunkenness - what else 
can one regard it as? - of style. No one suffers from it unless 
his spirit is unstable. 

Sec, tlicn, that the spirit is well looked after. Our thoughts 
and our words proceed from it. We derive our demeanour 
and expression and tlic very way we walk from it. If the 
spirit is sound and hcaldiy our style will be firm and forceful 

219 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC cm, 2 

and virile, but if the spirit tumbles all the rest of our person 
ality comes down in ruins witli it. 

The queen unharmed, the bees all live at onej 
Once she is lost, the hive’s in anarchy.* 

The spirit is our queen. So long as she is unharmed, the rest 
remains at its post, obedient and submissive. If she wavers 
for a moment, in the same moment the rest all falters.f 


LETTER CXXII . 

The daylight has begun to diminish.- It has contracted-con- 
siderably, but not so much that there is not a generous amount 
remaining still for anyone who wih, so to speak, rise with the 
daylight itself. More active and commendable still is the 
person who is waiting for the daylight and intercepts the 
first rays of the sun; shame on him who lies in bed dozing 
when the sun is high in the sky, whose waking hoius com- 
mence in the middle of the day - and even this time, for a 
lot of people, is the equivalent of the small hours. There are 
some who invert the functions of day and night and do not 
separate eyelids leaden with the previous day’s carousal 
before night sets in. Their way of life, if not their geographical 
situation, resembles the state of those peoples whom nature, 
as Virgil says, has planted beneath our feet on the opposite 
side of the world 

And when Dawn’s panting steeds first breathe on us. 

For them the reddening Evening starts at length 
To light their lamps.J 

* Virgil, Georgies, IV: 212-13. 
f The last 34 lines are omitted (§§23 to 27). 

:|: Georgies, l:zso-si. 


220 



LETTER CXXII 


cxxii,s 

There are some antipodes living in the same city as ourselves 
■who, as Marcus Cato said, have never seen the smi rise or set. 
Can you imagine that these people know how one ought to 
live when they do not know when one ought to live? Can 
they really he afraid of deatlr like other people when this is 
v?hat they have retreated into in their own lifetimes? They 
are as weird as birds that fly by night. They may while away 
their hours of darkness to a backgrovmd of wine and perfume, 
they may occupy the whole of the time they spend, contrarily, 
awake eating sumptuous dishes - individually cooked, too, in 
a long succession of diflerent courses; but what in fact they 
are doing is not banqueting but celebrating their own last 
tites. At least the dead have their memorial ceremonies during 
the daytime. Heavens, though, no day is a long one for a 
pan who is up and about! Let us expand our life; action is 
its-theme and duty. The night should be kept within bounds, 
^d a proportion of it transferred to the day. Poultry that are 
being reared for the table are cooped up in the dark so as to 
prevent them moving about and make them fatten easily; 
diere.they languish, getting no exercise, witli the swelling 
taking possession of their sluggish bodies and the inert fat 
creeping over them in their magnificent seclusion. And the 
bodies of these people who have dedicated themselves to the 
dark have an unsightly look about them, too, inasmuch as 
their complexions are unhealthier looking tlian those of 
persons who are pale through sickness. Frail and feeble v/ifJi 
their blanched appearance, in their case the flesh on the living 
person is deathlike. And yet I should describe this as the Jesst 
of their ills. How much deeper is tlie darkness in 
souls 1 Their souls are dazed and befogged, envioff', of tliC 
blind! What man was ever given eyes for the of the 
dark? 

Do you ask how the soul comes to liavt; tfk 
aversion to daylight and transference of iu V/foi/, 1-f/, ^ 

221 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC cxxn, 5 

night-time? All vices arc at odds with nature, all abandon 
tlic . proper order of things. The whole object of luxurious 
living is the delight it takes in irregular ways and in not merely 
departing from the correct course but' going to the farthest 
point away from it, and in eventually even taking a stand, 
diametrically opposed to it. Don’t you think it’s living un- 
naturally to drink without having eaten, taking liquor into an 
empty, system and going on to dinner in a dnuiken state? 
Yet this is a failing which is common among young people, 
who cultivate their capacities to the point of drinking - swill- 
ing would be a better description of it - in naked groups the 
moment they’re inside the doors of the public bath-house, 
every how and then having a rub all over to get rid of the 
perspiration brought on by continually putting down the 
piping hot liquor. To them drinWng after lunch or dinner is 
a common habit, something only done by rural worthies and 
people who don’t know where the true pleasure lies: the wine 
that gives a person undiluted eryoyment, they say, is the wine, 
that makes its way into his system tmobstructed instead of 
swimming about in his food; intoxication on an empty 
stomach is the kind that gratifies a man. 

Don’t you think it’s living unnaturally to exchange ones 
clothes for women’s?* Is it not living unnaturally to aim at 
imparting the bloom of youtli to a different period of life - 
can there be a sorrier or crueller practice than' that whereby 
a boy is never, apparently, allowed to grow up into a man, 
in order that he may endure a man's attentions for as long 
as may be? Won’t even. his years rescue him fiom the indig- 
nity his sex ought to have precluded? _ 

Is it not living unnaturally to hanker after roses during the 

winter, and to force lilies in midwinter by taking the requisite 

line 

the 


Steps to change their environment ana Keeping up 

* Costly materials such as the s51^ mentioned in “ 

diaphanoi robe (perlucentem togam) disapproved of m Letter CXIV. 

222 



cxxn.n 


LETTEH CXXII 


temperature witli hot water heating? Is it not living un- 
naturally to plant orchards on die top of towers, or to have a 
orwt of trees waving in the wind on tlic roofs and ridges of 
one s mansions, their roots springing at a height which it 
yould have been presumptuous for their crests to reach? Is 
tt not living unnaturally to sink the foundations of hot badis 
^ Ae sea and consider that one is not swimming in a refined 
ashion unless one’s heated waters are exposed to the waves 
snd storms? Having started to make a practice of desiring 
^verything contrary to nature’s habit, they finally end up by 
rea^g off relations with her altogether. ‘It’s daylight: time 
or bed! All s quiet: now for our exercises, now for a drive, 
now for a meal 1 The daylight’s getting nearer : time we had 
our dmner! No need to do as the crowd does: to follow the 
common, well-worn path in life is a sordid way to behave, 
ets leave the daytime to the generality of people. Let’s 
ave early hours that are exclusively our own.’ 

This sort of person is to me as good as dead. After all, how 
^ can a person be from the grave, and an luitimely one at 
nt, if he lives by the light of tapers and torches?* I can re- 
call a great many people who led this kind of life at one time, 
''^th a former praetor among them, too, Acihus Buta, the 
^an who had squandered an enormous fortune which he had 
jerked, and when he confessed his impoverished state to 
the emperor Tiberius was met with the remark, ‘You have 
■tvoken up rather late.’ Montanus Julius, a tolerably good 
poet, noted for his closeness to Tiberius and subsequent fall 
fiom favour, who used to give public readings of his verse, 
took great delight in working sunrises and sunsets into his 
compositions. Hence the remark of Natta Pinarius when 
someone was expressing disgust at the way Montanus’ 
reading had continued for a whole day and declaring that his 
readings weren’t worth attending: ‘I’m quite prepared to 
* Carried by custom at a child’s funeral. 

2,23 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC cxxn, II 

listen to him - can I say fairer than this - from sunrise to sun- 
set.’ When Montanus had just read the lines 


The sun god starts his fiery flames to extend. 
The rosy dawn to diffuse her light, and now 
That plaintive bird, the swallow, starts to thrust 
Her morsels down die throats of nestlings shrill, 
Widi gentle bill supplying each its share, 

With journeys yet to come, 


one Varus called out, ‘And Buta starts to sleep.’ Varus was a 
Roman knight, a friend of Marcus Vinicius, who was always 
in attendance at good dinners, for which he used to qualify 
by die sauciness of his tongue. It was he, too, who said alitde 
later on when Montanus had read 

The herdsmen now in byres have stalled their beasts, ' 

And night now starts to bring the drowsy world 
A dreamy stillness. 


‘What’s that you say? Night, is it, now? I’ll go and pay a 
morning call on Buta. ’ 

Buta’s upside-down way of life was a byword, and yet, as 
I’ve said, at one time this sort of life was led by a great many 
people. The reason why some people live in this sort of way 
is not that they think that night in itself has any spedal 
attraction, but that they get no pleasure out of anything which 
is usual; apart from the fact that dayhght is anathema to a 
bad conscience, a person who experiences a craving or a 
contempt for things in proportion to their costliness or chea^ 
ness looks down his nose at a form of illumination which 
does not cost him ' any thing. Moreover the man who lives 
-extravagantly wants his manner of living to be on 'evety- 
bodv’s lips as long as he is aUve. He thinks he is wasting his 
time if he is not being talked about. So every now and then 
he does something calculated to set people talking. Pknty of 
people squander fortunes, plenty of people keep mistresses. 

^ 224 



cxxn;i8 LETTER CXXII 

To win any reputation in this sort of company you need to go 
in for something not just extravagant hut really out ■ of the 
ordmary. In a society as hectic as this one it takes more tliaii 
common profligacy to get oneself talked about. 

I once heard that delightful story-teller, Albino vanus Pedo, 
describing how he had lived above Sextus Papmius. Papinius 
was one of the daylight-shy fratermty. ‘About nine o clock 
night I’d hear the sound of whips. “What s he doing? I d 
ask, and be told he was inspecting the household accounts. 
About twelve I’d hear some strenuous shouting. What s 
that?’’ I’d ask, and be told he was doing his voice exercises. 
About two I’d ask what the noise of wheels meant, and be 
told he was off for his drive. About daybreak there would be a 
scurrying in all directions, a shouting for boys and a chaos 
of activity among stewards and kitchen staff. What is it? 

I d ask, to be told he was out of his bath and had called for his 
pre-dinner appetizer. “His dinner, then,’’ it might be said, 
“exceeded the capacity of his day.’’ Far from it, for he lived 
in a highly economical fashion: all he used to bum up was 
the night.’ Hence Pedo’s remark when some people were 
describing Papinius as being mean and grasping: I take it 
you would describe him as being an artificial light addict as 
well.’ 

You needn’t be surprised to discover so much individuality 
where the vices are concerned. Vices are mamfold, take 
countless different forms and are incapable of classificatiori. 
Devotion to what is right is simple, devotion to what k 
wrong is complex and admits of infiiute variations. It is the 
same with people’s characters; in those who follow nature 
they arc straightforward and uncomplicated, and differ only 
in minor degree, while those that are warped are hopelessly 
at odds with the rest and equally at odds with themselves. 
But the chief cause of this disease, in my opmion, is an attitude 
of disdain for a normal existence. These people seek to set 


225 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC cxxn, l8 

themselves apart from the rest of the world even in the manner, 
in which they organize their time-table, in just the same way 
as they mark themselves off from others by the way they dress, 
by the stylishness of their entertaining and the elegance of 
their carriages. People who regard notoriety as a reward for 
misbehaviour have no inclination for common forms of mis- 
behaviour. And notoriety is the aim of all these people who 
live, so to speak, back to front. We therefore, Lucdius, should 
keep to the path which nature has mapped out for us and 
never diverge from it. For those who follow nature everything 
is easy and straightforward, whereas for those who fight 
against her life is just like rowing against the stream. 


LETTER CXXIII 

I’ve reached my house at Alba at last, late at night and worn 
out by the journey (which wasn’t so much long as thorougldy 
uncomfortable) to find nothing ready for my arrival - apart 
from myself So I’m in bed, recovering from my fatigue, and 
making the best of this slowness on the part of the cook and 
the baker by carrying on a conversation with myself on this 
very theme, of how nothing is burdensome if taken lightly, 
and how nothing need arouse one’s irritation so long as one 
doesn’t make it bigger than it is by getting irritated. My baker 
mav be out of bread, but the farm manager will have some, or 
the steward, or a tenant. ‘Bad bread, yes!’ you’ll say. Wait, 
then- it’ll soon turn into good bread. Hunger will make you 
find even that bread soft and wheaty. One shouldn’t, accord- 
ingly, eat until hunger demands. I shall wait, then, and not 
eafmtil I either start getting good bread agam or cease to 
c oKniit bad bread. It is essential to make oneself used 
OTtrine up with a little. Even the wealthy and the well pro- 
^ . 226 



LETTEIS CXXin 

'idcdarc contmually mci aiul frustrated hy difficuk times and 
^tuanons. It is in no man's power to have v/lutcvcr he wants; ’ 
tut he has it in his power not to wish for wliat he hasn't 
got, aitd chccrfullv make the most of the ihincs that do come 

1 • t 

Uls way. And a stomach firmly under control, one that will 
put up with hard usage, marks a considerable step towards 
ui<lepcndcncc. 

^ I m deriving immeasurable satisfaction from the way my 
tiredness is becoming reconciled to itself. I’m not asking for 
tuasscurs, or a hot bath, or any remedy except time. What 
Was brought on by exertion rest is talcing away. And whatever 
^ud of meal is on die way is going to beat an inaugural 
uanquet for enjoyment. I have, in fact, put my spirit to a 
sort of test, and a surprise one, too - such a test being a good 
ocal more candid and revealing. When tlic spirit has prepared 
Itself beforehand, has called on itself in advance to show 
endurance, it is not so clear just how much real strength it 
possesses; the surest indications arc the ones it gives on the 
spur of the moment, when it views annoyances in a mamier 
tiot merely urmifflcd but serene, when it refrains from 
flying into a fit of temper or picking a quarrel widi someone, 
■when it sees to everything it requires by refraining from 
hankering after this and that, reflecting that one of its habits 
may miss a thing, but its own real self need never do so. 
Until we have begun to go without them, we fail to realize 
bow unnecessary many tilings arc. W^e’ve been using them not 
because we needed them but because we had them. Look at 
the number of things we buy because others have bought 
them or because they’re in most people’s houses. One of tlie 
causes of the troubles that beset us is the way our lives are 
guided by the example of others; instead of being set to rights 
by reason we’re seduced by convention. There are things 
that we shouldn’t wish to imitate if they were done hy only 
a few, hut when a lot of people have started doing them we 

227 


LETTERS FROM A STOIC 


cxxni,6 


follow along, as though a practice became more respectable 
by becoming more common. Once they have become general, 
mistaken ways acquire in our minds the status of correct ones. 
Nobody travels now without a troop of Numidian horsemen 
riding aliead of him and a host of runners preceding his 
carriage. One feels ashamed not to have men with one to 
hustle oncoming travellers off the road and to show there s a 
gentleman coming by die cloud of dust they raise. Everybody 
nowadays has mules to carry his crystal-ware, his myrrhine 
vessels and the other articles engraved by the hands of master 
craftsmen. One is ashamed to be seen to have only the kind of 
baggage which can be jolted around without coming to any 
harm. Everyone’s pages ride along' with their faces smeared 
with cream in case the sun or the cold should spoil their 
delicate complexions; one is ashamed if tliere is no member of 
one’s retinue of boys whose healthy cheeks call for protection 
witli cosmetics. 

With all such people you should avoid associating. These 
are the people who pass on vices, transmitting them from one 
character to another. One used to think tiiat the type of 
person who spreads tales was as bad as any: but there are 
persons who spread vices. And association with them does a 
lot of damage. For even if its success is not immediate, it 
leaves a seed in the mind, and even after we’ve said goodbye 
to them, the evil follows us, to rear its head at some tixne or 
other in the fhture. In the same way as people who’ve been 
to a concert carry about with them the melody and haunting 
quality of pieces they’ve just heard, interfering with their 
tiiinkine.and preventing them- from concentratmg on any- 
thing serious, so the talk of snobs and parasites sticks in our 
^fong after we've hard it. And it’s 6r ftojn easy w 
cate thJe haunting notes firom the memory; they stay w* 

“ lasting on and on, coming back to us every so 

“Uy we must shut out ears against mischievous talk, and as 

228 



oom,iz LETTER CXXIII 

soon as it starts, too; once such talk has made its entry and 
teen allowed inside, it hccomes a good deal bolder. Even- 
tually it reaches the stage where it says that ‘virtue and 
philosophy and justice are just a lot of clap-trap. There’s 
only one way to be happy and diat’s to make the most of 
life. Eating, drinking, spending tlie money tliat’s been left 
to you, that’s what I call living - and that’s what I call not 
forgetting that you’ve got to die some day, too. The days arc 
dipping by, and life is nmning out on us, never to be restored. 
Why should we hesitate? What’s the point of being wise? 
Our years won’t always allow us a life of pleasure, and in the 
meantime while they’re capable of it and clamouring for it, 
■whats the point of thrusting austerity on them? Steal a 
march on death by disposing here and now of whatever he is 
gomg to take away. Look at you - no mistress, no boy to make 
your mistress jealous. Every day you go out sober. You eat as 
if you had to submit a daily account book to your fatlier for 
approval. That’s not hving — that’s merely being a part of the 
life enjoyed by other people. And what madness it is to deny 
yourself everything and so build up a fortune for your heir, 
a policy which has the effect of actually turning a friend into 
an enemy, through the very amount that you’re going to 
leave him, for the more he’s going to get ^e more gleeful 
he s going to be at your death. As for those sour and disap- 
proving characters, those critics of other people’s hves — and 
spoilers of their own - who set themselves up as moral 
■ tutors to society at large, you needn’t give tuppence for them; 
you needn’t ever have any hesitation when it comes to putting 
good living before a good reputation.’ 

These are voices you must steer clear of like those which 
Ulysses refused to sail past until he was lashed to the mast. 
They have the same power; they lure men away from country, 
parents, friends and moral values, creating expectations in 
them only to make sport out of the wretchedness of lives of 

22,9 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC cxxni, I2 

degradation.* How much better to pursue a straight course 
and eventually reach that destination where the things that are 
pleasant and the things that are honourable finally become, 
for you, the same. And we can achieve this if we realize that 
there are two classes of things attracting or repelling us. We 
are attracted by wealth, pleasures, good looks, political ad- 
vancement and various otlier welcoming and enticing pros- 
pects: we are repelled by exertion, death, pain, disgrace and 
limited means. It follows tliat we need to train ourselves not to 
crave for tlie former and not to be afraid of the latter. Let us 
fight the battle the other way round - retreat from die things 
that attract us and rouse ourselves to meet the things that 
actually attack us. You know the difference, Lucilius, between 
the postures people adopt in climbing up and descending a 
mountain; those coming down a slope lean back, those 
moving steeply upwards lean forward, for to tilt ones 
weight aliead of one when descending, and backwards when 
ascending, is to be in league with what one has to contend 
with. The path that leads to pleasures is the downward one: 
the upward climb is the one that takes us to rugged and 
difficult ground. Here let us throw our bodies forward, m 
the other direction rein them back. 

Are you now supposing that the only people I consider a 
danger to our ears are the ones who glorify pleasure and 
inculcate in us a dread (itself a fearsome thing) of pain? No, 

I think we’re also damaged by the people who urge us under • 
colour of Stoic beHefs to do what’s wrong. They make much 
of our principle that only a man of wisdom and experience 
can really love. ‘He’s the one man with a natural gift for the 
art of love-making, then,’ they say, ‘and he’s equally in the 
best position to know all about drink and parties. Well, 
here’s a question for discussion: up to what age is it proper to 

love young men? 

* Text corrupt. 

230 



LETTER CXXIII 

This sort of thing may be all right for the Greeks, but the 
of talk to which we Avould be better to turn our cars is 
No man’s good by accident. Virtue has to be learnt. 
Pleasure is a poor and petty thing. No value should be set on 
It: It s something we share with dumb animals - the minutest, 
®ost insignificant creatures scuttcr after it. Glory’s an empty, 
changeable thing, as fickle as the weather. Poverty’s no evil 
to anyone unless he kicks against it. Death is not an evil, 
^hat is it then? The one law mankind has that is free of all 
iscrimination. Superstition is an idiotic heresy : it fears those 
It should love; it dishonours those it worships. For what 
wnerence does it make whether you deny the gods or bring 
them into disrepute?’ These arc tilings which should be learnt 
not just learnt but learnt by heart. Philosophy has no 
usmess to supply vice with excuses; a sick man who is 
encouraged to live in a reckless manner by his doctor has not 
^ hope of getting well. 




NOTES 


senega’s life 

1. The date of Seneca’s birtK is not known. Scholars have tended to - 
phee it in cither 5 or 4 b. c., although sonic have put it as early as 
8 B. c. or as late as A. D. 4. 

2- A procurator was a kind of commissioner or agent, as a rule 
tnainly concerned with revenue collection, although he might 
hold high administrative ranlc. Some provinces had a procurator 
as their governor. 

3- He wrote two handbooks on the subject for his sons. These, the 
Suasoriae and Coutroversioe, acquired a wide reputation and have 
survived to the present day. 

A'Antiquus rigor, as he calls it, writing to his mother {ad Helviam 
17.3). 

S- Letter LXXVni.2. 

6. Pliny {Natural History, VI; 60) speaks of Seneca’s work on India as 
mentioning 60 rivers and 118 different races — an indication of the 
facilities for research at Alexandria. 

7" Suetonius {Caligula, 53) says the emperor disparagingly called 
him a mere ‘text-book orator’, his style ‘sand without cement’ 
{arena sine cake). 

8- Dio, Roman History, LIX; 19. . 

9. A fragment of Suetonius (as quoted, by the scholiast on Juvenal, 
Satires, V-.iog) states that Seneca was exiled on the pretext of his 
being linked with the scandalous love affairs of Julia Livilla 
{quasi conscitis adulteriorum Juliae). Dio {Roman History, LX; 8) 
too speaks as if Seneca was, only an incidental victim, the accusa- 
tion originating in Messalina’s jealousy of Julia (a sister of 
Agrippina, and apparently a beautiful and cultivated woman). 

10. Tacitus, Annals, XIII; 8. 

11. ibid., xm; 3. 

12. ‘ For five years Nero was so great a ruler, from the point of view of 
Rome’s development and progress, that Trajan’s frequent claim 

233 


US, -12 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 

that no emperor came near Nero in this five year period can he 
fully justified’, to paraphrase the words of Aurelius Victor, Je 
Cacsaribtis, 5, ii (Nero . . . qtiwqueiinium taiucn tantiis fuit, 
urbe maxima, uti merito Trajamis sacpius testaretur procul differe 
cimcios priucipes Neroitis qiiitiqucmuo). It should be added that not 
all historians arc agreed that the qtiwquemnum Neronis refers to 
tire first five years of his rule. 

13. Roman History, LXl: 2. 

14. Annals, Xllltri. 

15. Voluptatibus coitccssis, by which Tacitus may be presumed to 
refer to the arts, sensuality and non-political cruelties. 

16. Annals, XIII: 2. 

17. Roman History, 1X1:4. 

18. Grimal, The Civilization of Rome. Seneca’s American translator, 
Gummerc, suggests that this anomalous state of affairs may be 
seen as an experiment with Plato’s ideal of philosopher-langship) 
and one which also took account of the conditions of the time, 
striking a balance between the dangers of one-man rule (of which 
the recent- reign of Caligula was a vivid illustration) and the 
impossibility of a return to the free elections and near anarchy of 
the Republic; he describes the result as a kind of cabinet system 
in which Seneca was the cabinet. 

19. Tacitus, Annals, XIH : 42 and Dio, Roman History, LXI: 10 are our 
sources for the sort of thing that was becoming gossip. 

20. Satires, X:i6. Tacitus (Annals, XV: 64) also used this word 
praedives, ‘immensely wealthy’, of Seneca, who was almost 
certainly a millionaire, in terms of sterling, four or five tim^ 
over. Juvenal incidentally speaks of his generosity with his 

' money as if it was well known even after he was dead (Satires, 

V:i09). , , 

21. Roman History, LX: 32. This historian states that Seneca s sudden 
recall, backed by force, of enormous sums of money which he 
had lent to leading natives of the reeently conquered province of 
Britain was a cause of the rising of Buduica or Boudicca 

{‘Boadicea’)inA.D. 61. 

23 fa iftteR CVni and LXXXHI, for example, fa letter LXXXVH 


234 



NOTES 

he desCTibes an expedition undertaken ky himself and a close . 
fiiend (Caesonius Maximus, himself a man who had had a 
distinguished career) in a mule-cart with the simplest of sleeping 
equipment and only figs or bread to eat; he speaks of having 
had a blissful two days’, hut regrets to report that he could not 
help blushing whenever they met people travelling in greater 
style (cf. p. 228). 

History, LXI;i8. Dio, usually hostile to Seneca, reporte 
many reliable sources’ as saying that Seneca helped incite Nero 
to liquidate Agrippina {Roman History, LXI: 12), 

The murder, its significance, and the possibility (remote) of 
Seneca s complicity are discussed by S. J. Batomsky and P. J. 
Bichnell in Theoria, volume 19 (1962) pp. 32-6 and volume 21 
(1963) pp. 42-5 (University of Natal Press). 

25. Ama/s, XIV : 52 f. 

26. ibid., XV; 45. , ' 

27 .ibid.,XV; 65 . ■ 

28. ibid., XV: 60-64. The passage is given on p. 243 in Michael 
Grant’s translation, from the Penguin Classics Tacitus: The 
Annals of Imperial Rome. It incidentally illustrates (like- the 
■ bcgimiing of Letter CIV) the close affection between him and his 
young second wife. There is a rather touching mention. in his 
treatise entitled Anger of how his .first wife, after the light was 
out for the night, would keep quiet while he made his customary 
review of everything he had done or said in the course of the 
day(DeJra,lII;36). 

29 - Augustine (De Civitate Dei, VI: 10) says that Seneca quod adpahat 
t^dorabat, ’worshipped the very things he criticized’. Milton 
speaks of him as ‘in his books a philosopher’. La Rochefoucauld, 
for the frontispiece of an edition of his Reflexions, has him por- 
trayed with villainous features from which a figure of Cupid 
representing L’ Amour de la Veritd has just stripped a mask of 
virtuous amiability. 

30. Natural History, XIV : 51. 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 


SENECA AND PHILOSOPHY 

31. Letter LXII. 

32. The Stoics were considered by many as contumaces ...ac refractarios, 
cofitmptores magistratuum ant regitm eorumve per quos publica 
administraiitnr, ‘hostile to authority and resistant to discipline, 
disdainful of kings, magistrates or public officials’ (Letter LXXIH). 
There are a number of cases of Stoics whose lack of respect for 
emperors earned them martyrdom. 

33. Letter XLVIIL 

34. Letter LVIL Compare Letter VI. 

35. A few examples of sayings or ideas so paralleled are those of 
I Cor. iii, i<3 (God’s ‘indwelling presence’ - cf. Letter XLf, 
wit.); I Tim. vi, 10 (‘money the root of all evil’); Jobi, 21 (we 
came into the world naked and go out of it naked, and ‘the Lor^ 
gave, and the Lord hath taken away ’) ; Rom. xii, 5, 10 (we are mem- 
bers of one body, and ‘Be kindly affectioned one to another with 
brotherly love’, etc.); Acts xvii, 29 (God is not like any gold or 
silver image) ; Heb. iv, 13 (not even thoughts are hidden from Goo 
- cf Letter LXXXIU, init.); Matt, v, 45 (the sun rises on the 
wicked as well); and (as translated in the New English Bible) 
Eph. V, I (imitate, try to be like God). They do not lend any real 
support to theories that Seneca was influenced by St Paul or by 
Christian slaves in his own household. 

36. DrBasore. ' .,, 

37. Letter LXXV. Cf ‘Philosophy teaches us to act, not to talK 

(Letter XX). 


SENECA AND LITERATURE 

2 8. The introduction to the translation Four Tragedies and Octavia by 
' E. F.Watling (Penguin Classics) discusses generally the faults 0 
Senecan drama and the question whether it was performabic. 

See for example, DufiT, Literary History of Rome in the Silver Age. 

!o There are isolated passages of magnificent writing, poetic 

^ for example in parts ofLcttcrsXC and CIV. 

„ in XC, XCIV XCV. *= 

23^ 



NOTES 

incidentally (wKich discuss tlic question whether, in order to 
enable them to know what is the right tiling to do in a given 
situation, people need a general ‘doctrine’ or a sufficient number 
of precepts’, or. both) arc sufficient answer in themselves to 
entics who have said that Seneca is incapable of setting out a 
sustained, continuous, consistent argument. One might quote 
here the opinions of Coleridge: ‘You may get a motto for cvety^ 
sect in religion, but nothing is ever thought out by him’, and 
Qubtihan: ‘As a philosopher he was ratlicr slipshod, though a 
magnificent censor of moral faults’ {in philosophia partnn Migens, 
cgrc^iKS tamai vitioruni iuscctator, Institutio Oratorio, Xti.iap). 

42- b Letters CXV (c.g. quaere quid scribas, non quemadinodum, 

consider what, not how you should write’), C and elsewhere. 

43- Diiffi Literary History of Rome in the Silver Age. 

44- histitutio Oratorio, X:i.i 25 - 3 i forms throughout an interesting 
appraisal of Seneca by a famous scholar, advocate and teacher 
who died only thirty years or so after him. A short, late seven- 
teenth-century' comment on Seneca’s style is that to be found in 
Aubrey’s Lives: .‘Dr Kettle was wont to say that “Seneca writes, 
as aboare does pisse’’, scilicet, by jirkes.’ 

45. Oratio certain rcgtilam non habet, since fashion or usage {consuetudo) 
is constantly altering the rules (Letter CXIV). 

46 . Aulus Gellius, to give another example, described his language as 

trite and commonplace’ {vulgaria et protrita), his learning as being 
of a very ordinary, low-brow character’ {vernacula et plebeid). 

47- Dante quotes him frequently and ranks him (with Cicero) after 
Virgil only in the Inferno, Chaucer, in the Parson s Tale, classes 
Seneca with St Paul, Solomon and St Augustine. Petrarch 
modelled his letters on Seneca’s, which he knew intimately. The 
University of Piacenza was actually endowed with a Professor of 
Seneca. 

48 . Erasmus put many quotations from Seneca’s prose works into an 
anthology known as the Adagia which has been supposed to be 
the source of most of the imitations or borrowings found in 
Elizabethan writers. 

49 . Montaigne {Essays, 1 : 26 ) says ‘I have never got to grips with a 
single solid book, apart from Plutarch and Seneca, from whom 

. 237 



LETTERS FROM A STOIC 

I draw unceasingly for ever dipping and emptying my pitcher 

hkethe daughters ofDanaus’ (who were set to fill a Jeabhgjaras 
punishment m Hades). 

Muret, his teacher, was also a devoted admirer and editor of 
Seneca, and Montaigne’s brothcr-in-Iaw, Geof&ey de la 
Chassaignc made a translation of him. Lipsius, who edited (1605) . 
and lectured on Seneca, was a correspondent ofMontaigne. 

50. e was wont to soothe her ruffled temper with reading every 
morning, when she had been stirred to passion at the Council, or 
other matters had overthrown her gradous disposition. She did 
much^ admire Seneca s wholesome advisings when the soul’s 
guict is fled away, and I saw much of her translating thereof’ 

51. F. L, Lucas, Se/ieca atiJ Elizabethan Tragedy (Cambridge, 1922). 
This book and those by T. S. Eliot and E. F. Wading mentioned 
below (p, 241) will carry any interested reader well into the 
subject. 

52. Between 1595 ^tid 1620 his popularity rises even above Cicero’s, 
and his influence is seen in Lyly, Nashc, Daniel, Lodge (his 
first English translator), Bacon, Herrick, Donne (who plls him 
‘that great moral man Seneca’), Ben Jonson, Henry Vaughan, 
Cowley, Burton, Rubens, Drydcn, Pepys and Pope. G, Wilh'am- 
son's Tlte Senecan Amble (Chicago, 1951) and R. G. Palmer's 
Seneca’s De Remediis Fortuitornm and the Elizabethans (Chicago, 
1953) are full of examples of Seneca’s little knovm mark on 
English literature. 


LETTERS 


53. A lawyer’s joke. Pacuvius served there for many years as deputy 
to a governor who was never permitted to go to his province by 
the emperor Tiberius. Roman law, like ours, had a doctrine of 
title by prescription, that is to say, the legally recognized owners 
ship of land notwithstanding, sometimes, evidence that the 
occupier or ‘sguatter ’ is not the true owner, after sufiidently long 
occupation ofit. 

54. C£ Letter LXX. ‘You must not think that only great men have 
- possessed the strength to batter dovm the imprisoning walls of 

human servitude. You must not think that tin's can only be done 

238 



NOTES 

ty a man like Cato, who tore the life out of himself with his 
bare hands after failing to despatch it with a sword. Men of the 
lowliest rank have made the great effort and won deliverance; 
2nd in circumstances which did not allow tlicm to die as and 
■when convenient to tlrcmsclvcs, which did not permit them any 
choice in the selection of the means of death, they seized on any- 
thing that came to hand and by dint of violence made weapons 
out of objects of a normally quite harmless nature. 

There is. the recent example of one of the Germans being 
trained to fight beasts in the arena who, during practice for the 
morning show, retired to relieve himself; tliis was the only 
privacy allowed him, a guard otherwise invariably being present. 

In the lavatory he got hold of a rod with a sponge fixed on the 
end of it, put Acre for cleaning purposes, and stuffedthe whole of 
it down his throat and choked himself to dcatli. . . . Recently, 
^gain, a man was travelling on a wagon, under escort, to the 
morning show. He pretended to be nodding heavily with sleep 
2nd let his head drop until he was able to tlirust it in between the 
• spokes, and then hung on to his seat just long enough for the 
revolving wheel to break his neck, so escaping his punishment by 
means of the very vehicle on which he was being carried to it. 

SS- Seneca here appears to misquote "Virgil, who in our editiom 
speaks of ‘the phases of the moon’ and not the stars . Virgil s 
lines are actually part of a passage devoted to weather signs. 

56. The story that Diogenes (the famous Cynic philosopher who lived 
in ostentatious poverty in Adiens) slept in a tub no doubt dates 
from a time when the size of some Greek earthenware jars had 
, been forgotten. Daedalus, in Greek mythology, was thelegendary 
craftsman to whom all inventions could he attributed. 


An Index is appended at p. 24.5 ff. which gives a little elemen- 
tary information of possible use to those remaining curious about 
names or places appearing in the Letters. 




BIBLIOGRAPHY 


E. R. Bevan, Stoics and Sceptics (Heffer, 1965). 

The Cambridge Ancient History, vol. X (Cambridge, i 934 -)‘ 

Lio Cassius, Roman History, translated by E. Cary in tbe Loe senes 
vols. VII-VIII (Heinemann, 1924.-5). , ' 

]• Wight Duff, Lit&ary History of Rome in the Silver Age, 
relatively complete bibliographies concerning Seneca and s 
■works (Benn, 1964). 

T. S. Eliot, ‘Seneca in Elizabethan Translation’ in Selected Essays 
(Faber, 1951), 

G. Murray, Stoic, Christian and Humanist, 2nd Edn. pp. 57 4 * 
89-118 (Allen and Unwin, Watts, 1940). 

Tacitus, The Annals of Imperial Rome, translated by Michael Grant 

(Fengum Books, 1956). , . , 

E. H. Warmington, Nero: Reality and Legend (Chatto and Wmdus, 

E. E. Wading, introduction to Seneca: Four Tragedies and Octavia 
(Penguin Books, I96<5), 




APPENDIX 


Tacitus’ account of Seneca’s death {Annals, XV: 60-64) 

Nero asked if Seneca was preparing for suicide. Gavius Silvanus 
replied that he had noticed no signs of fear or sadness in his words or 
eatures. So Silvanus was ordered to go back and notify the death- 
sentence, According to one source, he did not return by the way he 
ad come but made a detour to visit the commander of the Guard, 
wemus Rufus; he showed Faenius the emperor’s orders asking if he 
should obey them; and Faenius, widi that ineluctable weakness 
™ich they all revealed, told him to obey. For Silvanus was himself 
one of the conspirators - and now he was adding to the crimes 
■Wnich he had conspired to avenge. But he shirked communicating 
Or witnessing the atrocity. Instead he sent in one of his staff-officers 
to tell Seneca he must die. 

Unperturbed, Seneca asked for his will. But the officer refused. 
Then Seneca turned to his friends. ‘Being forbidden’, he said, ‘to 
show gratitude for your services,' I leave you my one remaining 
possession, and my best: the pattern of my life. If you remember it, 
your devoted friendship will be rewarded by a name for virtuous 
socomplishments.’ As he talked - and sometimes in sterner and more 
imperative terms - he checked their tears and sought to revive their 
courage. "Where had their philosophy gone, he .asked, and that 
resolution against impending misfortimes which they had devised 
over so many years?. ‘ Surely nobody was unaware that Nero was . 
orueir he added. ‘After murdering his mother and brother, it only 
remained for him to kill his teacher and tutor .’ 

These words were evidently intended for public hearing. Then 
Seneca embraced his wife and, with a tenderness very different from 
his philosophical imperturbability, entreated her to moderate and 
set a term to her grief, and take just consolation, in her bereavement, 
from contemplating his well-spent life. Nevertheless, she insisted on 
dying with him, and demanded the executioner’s stroke. Seneca did 
not oppose her brave decision. Indeed, loving her wholeheartedly, 
he was reluctant to leave her for ill-treatment. ‘Solace in life was what 


243 



OTTERS FRO?vI A STOIC 

I commenced to you’, he said. ‘But you prefer death and glory. I 
will not grudge your setting so fine an example. We can die vnth 
egual fortitude. But yours will he the nobler end.’ 

Then, each v/ith one incision of the blade, he and his wife cut 
their arms. But Seneca’s aged body, lean firom austere living, released 
the blood too slowly. So he also severed the veins in his ankles and 
behind his knees. Exhausted by severe pain, he was afraid of weaken- 
ing his v/ife’s endurance by betraying his agony - or of losing his own 
^Ifi-possession at the sight of her sufferings. So he asked her to go 
into another bedroom. But even in his last moment his eloguence 
remained. Summoning secretaries, he dictated a dissertation. (It has 
been published in his own words, so I shall refrain fiora. para- 
phrasing it.) 

Nero did not dislike Paulina personally. In order, therefore, to 
avoid increasing his ill-rcputc for cruelty,, he ordered her suicide to 
be averted. So on instructions from the soldiers, slaves and ex-slaves 
bandaged her arms and stopped the bleeding. She may have been 
tmconscious. But discreditable versions are always popular, and some 
took a different view - that as long as she feared there was no appeas- 
ing Nero, she coveted the distinction of dying with her husband, 
but when better prospects appeared life’s attractions got the better 
ofher. She lived on for a few years, honourably loyal to her husband s 
memory, with pallid features and limbs which showed how much 
vital blood she had lost. 

Meanv/hile Seneca’s death was slow and lingering. Poison, such 
as was formerly used to execute state criminals at Athens, had long 
been prepared; and Seneca now entreated his well-tried doctor, who 
v/as also an old friend, to supply ft. But when it came, Seneca dr^ 
it without efiect. For his limbs were already cold and numbed against 
the poison’s action. Finally he was placed in a bath of warm v/ater. 

He sprinkled a little of it on the attendant slaves, commenting that 
this v/as his hbation to Jupiter, Then he was carried into a vapour- 
hath, v/here he suffocated. His cremarion was without ceremony, m 
accordance v/ith his own instructions about his death - wntten at 
theheiehtofhis wealth and power. 

{Translated by Michael Grant) 



INDEX OF PERSONS AND PLACES 


c WM, the southern part of Greece, forming a separate province of the 
Oman Empire, a province of which Seneca’s elder brother Gallio 
Was the governor in A.D. 50-51, 184, 

C l misi’flu Lake, the, in Campania, 107; 

f «, hero in the war of the Greeks against Priam’s Troy; lus anger 
Agamemnon, the son of Atreus and leader of the Greek forces, 

IS the foundation of the plot of Homer’s Iliad, 152, 193. 

^S’ohts, a celebrated vine-grower, 148-50. 

Was, the hero of Virgil’s epic poem, the Aeiteid, 159. 

0. or Alba Longa, an ancient place where Seneca had a country house, 
some twelve miles from Rome; the modem Castcl Gandolfo, 226. 
Zander of Macedon or Alexander the Great, famous conqueror (3 56-3 23 
B.C.) who carried Greek arms and culture to the farthest parts of 
the Middle East and even into India, 103, 143, 182. 

^xandria, founded by the above, important commercial city and centre 
of learning, capital of Egypt, 124, 

Jtacharsis, who lived in the early sixth century B.C., was one of the 
ater so-called Seven "Wise Men of antiquity, he appears to have 
preached the simple life later advocated by the Cynics, and to have 
been put to death for an attempt to introduce a Greek religious ritual 
into his country, Scythia (in what is now Southern Russia), 171—2. 
iacreon, a Greek lyric poet bom c. 570 B.C., 159. 

{Ancus Martins), early Roman king, traditionally 642-617 b.c., 
210. 


Antony, Mark,' colleague of Julius Caesar, later ally of Cleopatra, 
defeated by Octavian (Augustus) at Actium in 31 b.c., 144. 

Appius {Appins Claudius Caecus), Roman statesman, orator and first 
prose writer (Jl. c. -300 B.c), 217. 

Ardea, a town in a low-lying, then malarial area of Italy not far from 
Rome, 182, 194. 

Aristotle, famous Greek philosopher (384-322 b.c.), tutor of Alexander 
the Great, of immense learning, author of standard works on many 
scientific subjects and on logic, ethics, politics and drama, 40, 1 19-21. 

Ammtius, Lucius, Augustan senator and historian, consul 22 b.c., 218-19. 

Ascniiis, probably Asellins Sahmijs, Augustan literary figure and teacher 
of rhetoric, 85. 


24s 



INDEX 


Asia, 103 , l8o. 

Athens, i86. 

Attains, a Stoic pMosophcr whose lectures Seneca attended, 49, 115, 
201, 204, 207. 

Au^nstns, formerly called Octavian (63 b,c.-a.d, 14), under whom 
Rome changed from a republic into a principate, 142, 214. 

Baha, a clown, 62. 

Baiac, a fashionable spa on the Bay of Naples, 107-8. 

Bncillus, unknown, 148. 

Buta, Acilins, wealthy Roman, 223-4. 

Caesar, Julius, renowned Roman general and statesman, assassinated in 
44 B.C., 193-4. 

Caligula, the cruel emperor Gaius, a.d. 37-41, 129-30. 

Callistus, a former slave who had become a kind of secretary of state, 
dealing with petitions addressed to the emperor Claudius by private 
individuals, 92-3. 

Camhyses, King of Persia and its empire 529-521 b.c., conqueror of 

Egypt, 144. 

Campania, district of Italy around the modem Naples, 108, 142. 

Capri, 125. 

Cato (Marcus Porcius Cato), Roman statesman and stem moral figure, m 
his own lifetime (95-46 b.c.) and centuries following celebrated for 
his unbending principles; an opponent of Caesar and after civil war 
broke out a follower of Pompey; famous suicide after defeat of 
Pompeians at Thapsus (in what is now Tunisia); looked back on 
by later Romans as a champion of the republic, freedom and (like 
his famous great-grandfather who bore the same name) the old 
Roman morality (cf. Introduction, p. 17), 43, 56, 147, IPO, 


221 • 

Charinus, Athenian archon (official for 12 months, the year being dated 
by his name), 68. 

Charondas, Greek legislator of Catana, Sicily, about the sixth century 

B.C., 163* ' \ T, -irl 

Cfirysippus, century b.c., 163, Greek philosopher (c. 280-207 b.c.; ncaa 

of the Stoic school following Clcanthcs and a prolific writer; mouldc 

Stoicism into a formal system, with a basis in logic and a theory o 

knowledge to him probably more important than ethics, 51, 79, 


Cicero (Marcus Tullius Cicero). Roman advocate and statesinan (Jo6-43 
^c) whose writings included works presenting, almost Eor 
.rime in katin, the arguments of the Greek philosophers, and whose 

246 



INDEX 


literary style became a model (cf. Introduction, pp. 22-4), 85, 199, 
210-n, 217. 

Ckaiilbes, Greek philosopher, pupil and successor of Zeno as head 
(263-232 B.c.) of the Stoics’, introduced a religious note into the 
philosophy, among his writings there \vas a famous hymn to 
Zeus, of which a Christian might almost have been the author if 
for Zeus’ is read ‘God’; this has been preserved, 40, 79-80, 199, 

203. 

Qsopatra, Macedonian queen of Egypt whose ambitions, greatly 
eared at Rome, led her to become mistress in turn of Julius Caesar 
and Mark Antony, 144. 

Clitus, Macedonian noble who once in battle saved the life of Alexander 
die Great, biit was not always an unquestioning supporter of him, 

143. 


Cornelii, the plural of Cornelius, a name borne by many celebrated 
Romans, including the Scipios, 147. 

Corimcanitis (Tiberius Coruncanius), Roman statesman (consul 280 B.c.), 
soldier and jurist, 217. 

Cornu (Cortieliiis LetUulus Cossus), City Prefect under Tiberius, 142-3. 
Crassus (Lucius Licinius Crassus), Roman politician (consul 95 b.c.) and 
famous orator, 217. ' 

Crassus (Marcus Licinius Crassus), wealthy and power-hungry Roman - 
politician of the first century b.c., at different times opponent of 
Pompey or supporter of both Pompey and Caesar, 193. 

Croesus, proverbially rich king of Lydia, in Asia Minor, in the sixth 
century b.c., overthrown by the Persians, 93. 

Cumae, Italian coastal town near Naples, 106. 

Curio (Gains Scribonius Curio), Roman political figure (consul 76 b.c.), 

217. 

Cyprus, 180. 

L>aedalus, mythological Greek craftsman and inventor, 166. 

■Darius, powerful ruler of the Persian Empire (521—486 b.c.), who made 
unsuccessful attempts to conquer Greece, 93. 

L>emetrius, Macedonian military figure and later (in the early third 
century B.c.) King; campaigned in Greece, Cyprus and the Near 
East, 52. ' ■ ■ ■ ' 

Demetrius, a Cynic philosopher of the time, a friend of Seneca, 183. 
Democritus, much admired Greek philosopher and mathematician 
(c. 460-C. 370 B.c.) ; associated with'elahorate atomic theory of matter 
or the universe, 44, 172. 

Didymus, immensely learned Alexandrian Greek scholar of the first 


247 


INDEX 


Asia, T03, i8o, 

Athens, 186. 

Attains, a Stoic philosopher whose lectures Seneca attended, 49, US. 
2or, 204, 207. 

Anj^nstns, formerly called Octavian (63 b.c.-a.d. 14), under whom 
Rome changed from a republic into a prindpate, 142, 214. 

Baba, a clown, 6 z. 

Baiae, a fashionable spa on the Bay of Naples, 107-8. 

Bncillns, unknown, 148. 

Buta, Acilins, wealthy Roman, 223-4, 

Caesar, Julius, renowned Roman general and statesman, assassinated m 
44B.C., 193-4- 

Caligula, the cruel emperor Gaius, a.d. 37-41, 129-30. 

Callistus, a former slave who had become a kind of secretary of state, 
dealing \vith petitions addressed to the emperor Claudius by private 
individuals, 92-3. 

Cavtbyscs, King of Persia and its empire 529-521 B.c., conqueror of 
Egypt, 144. 

Campania, district of Italy around the modem Naples, 108, 142, 

Capri, 125. ' , 

Cato {Marcus Porcius Cato), Roman statesman and stem moral figure, m 
his own lifetime (95-46 b.c.) and centuries following celebrated for 
his unbending principles; an opponent of Caesar and after dvil war 
broke out a follower of Pompey; famous suiddc after defeat o 
Pompeians at Thapsus (in what is now Tunisia) ; looked back on 
by later Romans as a champion of the republic, freedom and (like 
his famous great-grandfather who bore the same name) the o 
Roman morality (cf. Introduction, p. 17), 43, 56, 147. rP®. 192-4. 

221. -atd 

Charinus, Athenian archon (ofSdal for 12 months, the year being date 

by his name), 68. 

Cbarondas, Greek legislator of Catana, Sicily, about the sixth century 

B.C., 163. N t, 4 

Chrysippus, century b.c., 163, Greek philosopher (c. 280-207 b.c.) nca 

of the Stoic school following Cleanthes and a prolific writer; mouldc 
Stoicism into a formal system, with a basis in logic and a theory o 
knowledge to him probably more important than ethics, 51, 79. 


Cicto (Marcus Tullius Cicero), Roman advocate and statesinan (roMS 
, B c ) whose writings included works presenting, almost ^ 

in Latin, the arguments of the Greek philosophers, and whose 

246 



INDEX 

literary style became a model (cf. Introduction, pp. 22-4), 85, 199, 
210-11, 217. 

Ckmthes, Greek philosopher, pupil and successor of Zeno as head 
the Stoics; introduced a religious note into the 
P osophy; among his writings there was a famous hymn to 
us, of which a Christian might almost have been the author if 

ot Zeus is read ‘God’; this has been preserved, 40, 79-80, 199, 
203. 

Cleopatra, Macedonian queen of Egypt whose ambitions, greatly 
^ted at Rome, led her to become mistress in turn of Julius Caesar 
and Mark Antony, 144. 

Macedonian noble who once in battle saved the life of Alexander 
e Great, but was not always an vuiquestioning supporter of him, 
^43- 

Conielii, the plural of Cornelius, a name borne by many celebrated 
Romans, including the Scipios, 147. 

ormicanius (Tiberius Conmcanitis), Roman statesman (consul 280 b.c.), 
soldier and jurist, 217. 

Cossiij {Cornelius Lentulus Cosstts), City Prefect under Tiberius, 142-3- 
Crassus (Lucius Licinius Crassus), Roman politician (consul 95 b.c.) and 
famous orator, 217. ' 

Crassus (Marats Licinius Crassus), wealthy and power-hungry Roman - 
politician of the first century b.c., at different times opponent of 
Pompcy or supporter of both Pompey and Caesar, 193 • 

Croesus, proverbially rich king of Lydia, in Asia Minor, in the sixth 
century b.c., overthrown by the Persians, 93 * 

Ciiiitae, Italian coastal town near Naples, 106. 

Curio (Gains Scribonius Curio), Roman political figure (consul 76 b.c.), 

217. 

Cyprus, 180. 

I^aedalus, mythological Greek craftsman ^d inventor, 166. 

^orius, powerful ruler of the Persian Empire (521-486 B.c.), who made 
Unsuccessful attempts to conquer Greece, 93. 

Denwtrius. Macedonian military figure and later (m the early third 
century B.c.) King; campaigned in Greece. Cyprus and the Near 

£*ist 

Demetrius, tL Cynic philosopher of the time, a friend of Seneca, 183. 
Democritus^ much admired Greek philosopher and mathematician 
(c. 460-c. 370 B.c.); associated with elaborate atomic theory of matter 
or the universe, 44 > ^ 72 - 

immensely learned Alexandrian Greek scholar of the first 

247 



INDEX 


centiiry . b , c ., producing (among other works) detailed commentaries 
on many classical authors, 159, 

Diogenes, renowned Greek philosopher (c. 400-325 b . c .), founder of 
the Cym'c sect (Greek kimikoi, the canine or 'doggish' people, so 
nicknamed, apparently, because he and many later followers lived 
by begging and made a virtue of shamelessness), wit, ascetic, declared 
enemy of convention and worldly goods, his preaching about virtue 
and the simple life was largely adopted by the Stoics, 93, 166. 

Elea, town founded by Greek colonists in south Italy which produced 
a number of philosophers (of the ‘Eleatic’ school, all morusts), 160. 
Ennius, early Roman poet (239-169 sic.), 21 1. 

Epiairns, famous Greek philosopher (342/1-271/0 b . c ,), founder of the 
Epicurean school, the main rival school to the Stoics; in physics 
followed, with modifications, Democritus' atomist doctrine, 
regarded sense-perception as the only basis of knowledge, decried 
superstitions and all fear of the gods or death, and advocated a 
retiring life; the highest good, in his and his successors' eyes, was 
pleasure (the Greek hedane), by which was meant not sensual indul- 
gence but rather an independent freedom from all care; established 
in Athens a community living under him the simplest (e.g. diet 
. mainly of bread and water) and most peaceful of existences; his 
letters, and will, reveal a warm, attractive personality, 34, 40, 44> 
46-7, 49. 52“3, 5<5, 59. <55, <58-9, 72, 75, 77-8, 89. 

Fabimis (JPapirius Fabiamis), philosopher, a pupil of Sextius, and a 
lecturer attended by Seneca, 55, 85. 

Fabitis Maximus, Roman statesman who did much, by tactics which 
earned him the title Cunctator (Delayer), to ensure final victory (a 
year after his death in 203 b.c.) over Hannibal, 147. 

Felicio, unknown, 57. 

Fenesteila, learned historian writing around the beginning of our era. 


210. 

Fiacens, fidend of Lucilius, 113. 

GaJIio (Lucius Junius Novatus), Seneca's elder brother whp became a 
consul and was governor of Achaea in a.d. 50-51 (cf. Mtroduction 
n 7) and to whom a number of Seneca’s works are dedicated, 184. 

Gai/us Asiuius, a venturesome politician who fell foul of the emperor 
Tiberius, whose former wife he had married long before; imprisoned 
. ^ p 2*0, he died in prison three years later of starvation, J06. 
character in Horace's SaCires, 148. 

? f; nur version of the Roman name (Gallia) - for the area of approxi- 
mately modem France, 177. 

248 



INDEX 

Gr(:^!Hi(G(ijiK Seiitpronius Gracchus), 217, Roman rcfonning politician, 
yiled in 123 b.c. 

Greece, 62, 180. 

Hmihal^ great Cartlragiman general and enemy of Rome, finally 
defeated by Sdpio, at Zama (in what is now Tunisia) in 202 b.c., 'I45- 
^<i(erius, Quintus, forceful Roman advocate, whose volubility led the 
emperor Augustus to say (according to Seneca’s father) ‘Hatcrius 
needs a brake’, 85. 

ftcato. Stoic philosopher from Rhodes, pupil of Panaetius; who wrote 
mainly books on ethics, 38, 40, 48. 

enilfl, wife of Priam, King of Troy, in Homer’s Uiad, 93, 152. 

in Homer Mcnclaus’ wife whose carrying off to Troy by Paris 
Drought about the Trojan war, 152. 

^itarchus, disciple of Epicurus and his successor as head of the Epi- 
eutean school, 40, 79. 

Huiod, early Greek didactic poet, 74, 152. 
tero, ruler of Syracuse, in Sicily, in the third century b.c., 218. 

Ollier, ancient Greek bard to whom the Uiad and Odyssey ate traced, 74, 
83, T52, 172, 

Horace, Roman lyric and satirical poet,' 148. ■ , 

^io, a clown, 62, 

153, 163. 

love or Jupiter, the sky-god, the Greek Zeus, chief of the Olympian 
deities, 51, 199. 

Jidius, Montanus, see Montamts, 223-4, 

Laelitis {Gaitts Laelius Minor), Roman politician of the second century 
B.c. (consul 140 B.C.), one of a circle of aristocratic and cultivated 
Romans receptive to Stoic ideas, 43, 56, 190- 
I^tin Road, the Via Latina, ancient road running south-east &om Rome, 

130. 

Liberalis, friend of Seneca, native of Lyons, 177-8, 181. 

Ltternwn, town on the Italian coast, now Torre di Patria, not far north 
of Naples, 145. 

Livy, chief Roman historian (59 B.c.-A.r>. 17), writing over a period 
of forty years a history of Rome in 142 books ffomthe earliest times 
to his own, 89. 

Litdl{ns(LiiciHusJtinior), the addressee of these letters and of the Naturales 
Quacstiones (Problems in Nature) and of an essay De Providaitia 
(On Providence), friend of Seneca, cf. Introduction pp. 12-13, 
passim. 

Lyairgus, legendary legislator of Sparta in Greece, 163. 

249 



INDEX 


Lyons, the Roman Lu^qdtitiunt, flourishing capital of one of the provinces 
of Gaul, founded in 43 b.c., 177, 181. 

Macedonia, also called Macedon, region in north of Greece which rose 
to world importance under Philip II and his son Alexander the 
Great; in 146 B.c. it became a province of the Roman empire, 180. 
Maecenas (Gains Maecenas), friend and often representative of Augustus; 

celebrated patron of literature, 213-15, 219. 

Marcellinns, Tullius, friend ofLueiJius, 126-7, 

Mars, Roman god of war, 61. 

Meander, much winding river, now the Menderes in western Turkey, 
188. 

Meirodoms, first among the disciples of Epicurus but died before the 
master; prolific writer, mainly attacking the arguments of other 
schools, 40, 68, 79. 

Montanus, (Montanus Julius), Augustan poet, admired by Seneca’s 
father, 223-4. 

Nausiphancs, Greek philosopher of the fourth century B.c., who fol- 
lowed Democritus’ atomist theory and taught Epicurus, 160-61. 
Neptune, the Roman god of the sea who, in his Greek character (Posei- 
don) constantly harried Ulysses (Odysseus) on his long voyage home, 
the story of Horner’s Odyssey, loi. 

Ncsis, the modem Nisida, not far from Naples, 100. 

Nestor, old warrior in Homer's Iliad, 130. 

Nik, no, 188, 

Niobe, in Greek mythology a mother suddenly robbed by divine, ven- 
geance of all her children, 114. 

Nomenium, the modem Montana, in central Italy, where Seneca had 
a celebrated vine estate, 184. 

North Africa, 194. 

Numa (Numa Pompilius), early Roman king, traditionally 715-^73 


210. 


Pacuvius, deputy to the governor of Syria during Tiberius’ rule, 58. 
Pallas, epithet of the goddess Athene, the Roman Minerva, one of 
whose temples stood on the promontory facing the island of Capn, 


125* 

Panaetius, Stoic philosopher (c. 185-109 B.c.) from Rhodes, .who knew 
many leading Romans; having also been the teacher of Posidonius 
arid an influence upon Cicero, he was largely instrumental , in the 
making known of Stoicism to Romans, 78. 

Panormus, the modem Palermo, in Sicily, 218. 

Paphos, city of Cyprus, 180: 


250 



INDEX 

Ptipiiiitis, Sextus, unknown Roman, 225. 

Pmeuides, fifth century B.c. Greek philosopher living in Italy, monist, 
often regarded as the founder of logic, whose study of the verb ‘to 
led him to deny, in opposition to Heraclitus, that anything 
changes, 160-1. ' 

Parlheiwpe, the early name, which continued to be used by Roman 
poets, of Neapolis (the modem Napoli or Naples), 100. 

PiXrochis, friend of Achilles, 152. 

Pmlma (Poinpeia Paulina), Seneca’s second wife, 184-5. 

Pfilo, Aihinovanus, poet, fHend of Ovid, 225. 
enclope, in Homer’s Odyssey the faithful wife of Ulysses who awaited 
his return faithfully for twenty years, 153. 

Pliarius, Seneca’s physical trainer, 140.- 

PliMifls, famous Athenian sculptor of the fifth century b.c., 48. 

dlositus, one of Seneca’s estate managers, 57. 

Piiiarius, Natta, unknown, 223. 

Pho,Liic(ns(Lt(ciiis Calpuniius Piso Frugi), Roman soldier and provincial 
governor (48 b.c.-a.d. 32)*, ‘pracfcctus’ (Prefect or Warden) of the . 
City of Rome, enjoying the trust of Tiberius, for twenty years, 142. 
Plancus {Lucius Munatius Plancus), distinguished Roman soldier and 
provincial governor, consul in 42 B.c., 181. x ’ ' 

Plato, famous Athenian philosopher (c. 429-347 b.c.), greatly influenced 
by Socrates, of whom he was a pupil, author of the celebrated doo 
trine of ideas, thinker whose writings have influenced almost every 
philosopher, ancient or modem, since his day, 40, 93, 119-20, 21a. ’ 
PoiyneniK, Greek philosopher, pupil of Epicums, 40, 68. 

Poinpey {Gnaeus Potiipeiis), ambitious and powerful Roman politician 
and successful general against foreign armies (106-48 b.c.), at first - 
allied to Caesar but later defeated by him in the civil wars and 
■ murdered, 55, 193-4. 

PoinpohiKs, probably Pomponius Secundus, little heard of but distin- 
guished Roman, consul in a.d. 44, successful military commander in 
Germany, poet and serious dramatist, 36. 

Posidonius, important Stoic philosopher (c. 135-c. 51 B.c.), a Greek of 
Syrian" birth, pupil of Panactius; also a historian and a scientist 
(studying e.g. the oceans and tides, and primitive cultures, and cal- 
culating the' circumference of the earth and the distance between the 
earth and the sun) ; Cicero attended his leemres and his writings were 
widely read; he taught, unusually among Stoics, that -the soul did 
not perish with the body, 79. 139, 163-5, 168, 170-72, 190, 212. 
Pria/n,Tastking ofTroy, 74, 193. 


INDEX 


Vatia, Scrvilitts, cautious Roman politician of the civil wars period, 
106-8. 

Vitttcius, Marais, Roman general, consul in 19 b.c., 224. 

Vinknis, Ptiblius, Augustan orator, quoted several times by Seneca’s 
father, consul in a.d. 2, 85. 

Virgil {Publius Vergilious A^oro), the greatest Roman poet (70-19 B.c.), 
author of the Roman epic, the Aencid, of the Georgies and shorter, 
pastoral poems, who soon became a model to later writers and a 
school text-book; Seneca quotes from him some 65 times in the 
Letters to Lucilius, 75-6, loi, 112, 149, 191, 208-9, 211, 220. 

Zaleucus, early Greek legislator, laying down laws for many cities 
founded by Greeks in Italy and Sicily, 163. 

Zeno, founder, having previously been a Cynic, of the Stoic philosophy 
in the early part of the third century b.c. (cf. Introduction, p. 14.); 
author of most of its basic beliefs, regarding ethics as the most impor- 
tant part of philosophy, 40, 79-80, 141, 190, 212. 

Zeno of Elea, Greek monist philosopher and logician, bom about 490 
B.C., pupil of Parmenides, 160-61. 


MORE ABOUT PENGUINS 
AND PELICANS 


For further information about books available from Penguins 
please write to Dept EP, Penguin Books Ltd, Harmondsworth, 
Middlesex ub? oda. • ’ 

In. the U.S.A.: For a complete list of books available from 
Penguins in the United States write to Dept CS, Penguin Books 
62s Madison Avenue, New York, New York 10022. 

In Canada: For a complete list of books available from Penguins 
in Canada write to Penguin Books Canada Ltd, 2801 John Street 
Markham, Ontario L3R IB4. ' 

In Australia: For a complete list of books available, from Penguins 
in Australia write to the Marketing Department, Penguin Books 
Australia Ltd, P.O. Box 257, Ringwood, Victoria 3134. 

In New Zealand: For a complete list of books available from 
Penguins in New Zealand write to, the Marketing Department, 
Penguin Books (N.Z.) Ltd, P.O. Box 4619, Auckland 10. 



PENGUIN CLASSICS 

“Penguiri continue’ to pour out the jewels of the world’s classics 
in translation . . . There arc now nearly enough to keep a man 
happy on a desert island until the boat comes in' - Philip 
Howard in The Times 

, . A Selection 

. ' Thiophile Gautier- ■ 

MADEMOISELLE DE MAUPIN 
Translated by Joanna Richardson 

Murasaki Shikibu, • ' 

THE TALE OF GENJl';: ■ . 

Translated by Edward G. Sddensticker : 

’ A ' ‘Y . > ^ ^ 

, THE GREEK ANTHOLOGY' 

Edited by Peter Jay 

j ■ , Three Sanskrit Plays • ~ . ^ 
■SAKUNTALA /RAKSHASA'S RING 

‘ malatT and, K^ADAVA , ‘ 

Translated by Michael, Coulson ' 

„ ORKNEYINGA 'sAGA 
;T/anslated by Hermann P^sson and Paul Edwards 




